The Project Gutenberg EBook of Carta de hum cidadam de Genova a hum seu
correspondente em Londres, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Carta de hum cidadam de Genova a hum seu correspondente em Londres

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: June 7, 2006 [EBook #18528]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORRESPONDENTE EM LONDRES ***




Produced by Rita Farinha and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by National
Library of Portugal (Biblioteca Nacional de Portugal).)









Carta de hum cidadam de Genova a hum seu correspondente em Londres.


Entre os fataés eventos desta presente guerra, entendo serà de V.m. sem
duvida havido por digno de maior ponderaçaõ, o que aconteceo na Cidade
de Genova, no dia dez do corrente; eu, que com horror vi o principio, e
o fim delle, faltaria aos empenhos da nossa boa amizade se deixasse de
participalo a V.m. com individuarlhe as cauzas de que se originou, e
narrarlhe sinceramente os factos mais essenciaes de que se compoz.

Jà constaràõ a V.m. os artigos do dia 6. de Setembro, intimados a esta
Serenissima Republica pelo Comandante do Exercito Austriaco, e ainda que
ella se achasse nessa occasiaõ constrangida a submeterse a quaesquer
Leys, ditadas com a superiorïdade das forças, com tudo os seus Povos as
sofriaõ de mào animo naõ só por conhecerem quam graves, e indecorosas
fossem para o Governo, e para toda a naçaõ, quanto mais por as crerem
totalmente alheyas das maximas, sempre grandes, e generosas de S.
Magestade Imperatriz Rainha, contra a qual a dita Republica nunca teve
guerra.

Aumentou-se extremamente o commum sentimento, quando em 8. de Setembro
foraõ intimadas do General Comissario Conde de Chotek, as exorbitantes
contribuições de nove milhões de cruzados: o ferro, o fogo, e o sacco,
que irreparavelmente ameaçava em caso de repulsa, encheo tanto de ira o
Povo como de terror, considerando que as vidas, as fazendas, e a
liberdade de cada qual naõ dependia jà mais, que de petitorios
inexecutaveis, e do dispotico procedimento dos exactores, em que se naõ
descubria moderaçaõ alguma.

Pagos os primeiros tres milhões de cruzados, e outros cento e cincoenta
mil de refresco ao Exercito, todos no termo de cinco dias; renovaraõ-se
outra vez bem de pressa ao Governo as mesmas insistencias, e ameaços por
outros tres milhões, que foy precizo logo pagar; nem serà defficil o
conjecturar quanto internamente se enfurecesse o Povo, vendo
publicamente transferir para o quartel General somas tam relevantes.

A natural impossibilidade de as achar em outra parte, e o forçoso
objecto de remir a Cidade do horror das execuções militares, a cada
instante ameaçadas, obrigou este Serenissimo Publico ao extremo
expediente de pôr mão no sagrado deposito da Caza de S. Giorge, a donde
se conserva com integerrima fé o dinheiro, assim dos proprios nacionaes,
como dos estranhos: por esta nunca ouvida resoluçaõ, todos os Cidadões,
e com especialidade os homens de negocio, e os muitissimos, que vivem
delle, ficáram extremamente sentidos, ou jà pelo espolio gravissimo de
tantas familias, ou já pelo pejo de ver violada aquella Caza, que se
respeitava como principal alicerse da Republica, e seus subditos, ou
tambem pela irreparavel ruina do comercio, que se sumergia totalmente
sem esperança de nunca mais restituir-se ao seu antigo credito, pela
falta dos thesouros, extorquidos da dita Caza.

Ficarà V.m. admirado, que àlem destas contribuiçoens, sem exemplo,
chegasse o Senhor Conde de Chotek (sempre com os mesmos ameaços) a pedir
outro milhaõ, e duzentos mil cruzados em dinheiro de contado, por conta
dos quarteis de inverno, sem incluir nesta soma, o que em especie pedia
para mais cõmoda subsistencia dos ditos quarteis; porem ainda mais
estranharà V.m. que nunca podesse a Republica conseguir os passaportes,
que pedio para os quatro Patricios, que destinou para na Corte de Vienna
implorarem hum justo alivio a tantas oppressões, mas sim que fosse por
todos os modos embaraçada a via, por onde na dita Corte se podesse
esperar os effeitos daquella generosa clemencia, que sem duvida teriaõ
experimentado estes Povos, quando Sua Magestade Emperatriz Rainha, fosse
informada da minima parte dos seus infortunios.

Chegaraõ com tudo a Genova, por varias partes, avizos certos, que Sua
Magestade Emperatriz Rainha comovida, naõ tanto dos impulsos do seu
rectissimo animo, quanto dos bons officios de algumas Cortes, e
particularmente da de Roma, tinha prometido a Mons. Nuncio, que rezide
em Vienna, que diminuiria à Republica a terceira parte das
contribuições, em que foy multada; extremo porèm foi o sentimento destes
Povos, quando entenderaõ, que as representaçoens pervenidas em Vienna
destes Senhores Generaes, fizeraõ revogar tal indulto.

Com effeito, em lugar da dita diminuiçaõ, ouvio-se pelo contrario no dia
30. de Novembro, intimar absolutamente o pagamento da dita terceira
parte, e aumentar eximiamente as primeiras pretenções dos quarteis de
Inverno, por[~q] foraõ taixados em outros tres milhões de cruzados, com
outras relevantes somas; de maneira, que àlem de seis milhões, e cento e
cincoenta mil cruzados jà pagos em dinheiro de contado, achava-se esta
Capital constrangida a pagar outros seis milhões e meyo, sem dilaçaõ,
com a cominaçaõ das mais rigorosas execuções militares.

A estas tam graves extorções, se ajuntava hum sem numero de aggravos,
que se multiplicavaõ cada dia mais contra o Povo desta Capital, como
contra os mais de todo o Estado; eu me naõ dilatarey em relatalos a V.m.
com distincçaõ, mas porque possa ter alguma idèa delles, bastarà entre
tantos, que V.m. saiba como nos lugares maritimos se tomavaõ por força,
e sem serem satisfeitas, as embarcações de toda a casta, para se
transportarem Tropas, e mantimentos; em outros se constrangiaõ as
Communidades a contribuir viveres para os Soldados, pela metade menos do
preço, que os compravaõ os proprietarios; nas terras mais pobres, se
extorquiaõ dos Officiaes subalternos somas consideraveis de dinheiro
debaixo de titulo de deixalos viver com quietaçaõ; as Tropas haviaõ de
ser abundantemente providas, com dispendio excessivo em huma Provincia
exteril, e limitada nas suas producções, e sem embargo disto, nunca
deixavaõ de devastar as terras, e as cazas, e os moradores mesmos naõ
ficavaõ izentos de pancadas, e outros insultos; os operarios ficavaõ
ordinariamente defraudados do seu trabalho, os Cidadões vilipendiados
com injurias, os Mercadores, e Tendeiros constrangidos a vender por
preços muito menos do justo, e finalmente o Povo todo quotidianamente
insultado, com palavras descompostas, e com violencias nunca vistas.

Hia-se entretanto em Genova diminuindo o pouco, que ainda ficou do
comercio, unico remedio da Cidade; e aumentava-se pelo contrario a
indigencia de tudo quanto se faz precizo para a vida; via-se despovoado
o Porto desta Capital, e todos os mantimentos, que traziaõ as
embarcações para o precizo sustento, eraõ violentamente embargados dos
Generaes, e Commissarios do Exercito, com o fundamento de prover com
elles a Armada, ou com o pretexto de derigilos na Provença; ficava
inteiramente interdicta a navegaçaõ, por falta de passaportes,
cruelmente negados do General Botta, e tanto mais necessario para as
embarcações, que navegavaõ de Portos remotos, quanto da extrema ruina a
qualquer casta de trafego livre; dentro do mesmo Porto, com exemplo
execrando, e nunca visto, se permitia fossem embargados os mesmos
navios, que nelle entravaõ, sem reparo ao damno enormissimo dos
proprietarios, e ainda mais de todo o Povo, a quem se tirava com tal
violencia os meyos de poder sustentar.

Alguns Officiaes de guerra Austriacos, tomavaõ a liberdade de entrar
hostilmente armados a cavallo na mesma alfandega, para darlhe busca;
acçaõ, que realmente indicava peores consequencias para todos os
negociantes, porque justamente temiaõ, que as fazendas, tanto proprias,
como alheyas, ficassem taõ pouco seguras no sempre respeitado couto da
dita Alfandega, como o dinheiro na Caza de S. George.

Para reparar tantas violencias, e tantos prejuizos naõ era sufficiente o
paternal zelo, e acertadas providencias do Governo, que naõ obstante ver
totalmente exhausto o publico erario, suspendia com tudo o aggravo de
novos impostos, antes procurava de suprimir parte daquelles, que saõ
indispensaveis para o Estado, porque os excessivos damnos, que causaraõ
as Tropas Austriacas, jà se naõ podiaõ de maneira alguma remediar.

O progresso das armas delRey de Sardenha na Ribeira do Poente, e o sitio
da Cidadella de Savona, causava a todos os Cidadões, e negociãtes as
mais dolorosas apprehenções, e com universal sentimento se fallava na
pessima constituiçaõ, em que se achava o nosso Publico constrangido a se
naõ deffender, nem cometer hostilidades contra as Tropas Piamontezas, a
tempo que estas hiaõ à sombra de Sua Magestade Imperatriz Rainha, e da
Armada maritima de Inglaterra, conquistando com pouco trabalho os seus
Estados, e as Praças mais importantes.

A motivos tam fortes de tam grande aflicçaõ, se juntava o receyo das
execuçoens militares, que jà se tinhaõ por inevitaveis, vista a
impossibilidade de se poder satisfazer as immensas somas jà expressadas,
e dos avizos certos, que chegavaõ de todas as partes, que o assguravaõ.

Reparava-se neste tempo, que por ordem do General Comandante Marquez
Botta, se faziaõ destintamente reconhecer, e examinar com cuidado os
Postos, e as Fortificações mais importantes de Genova; vio-se occupar
das suas Tropas o Bastiaõ de S. Bento, que domina esta Capital, e varios
outros Fortes dos novos muros, que a sogeitaõ, e se tem advertido, que
os cinco morteiros para bombas do dito Bastiaõ, foraõ apontados tres
delles contra a Cidade, e dous contra o Palacio Ducal, e finalmente
ouvio-se publicar de toda a Tropa, que Genova em breve tempo se
assemilharia a hum Inferno, que era precizo extorquir della atè o ultimo
real, e que se naõ devia aos moradores deixar mais, que os olhos para
chorarem as suas disgraças.

Qualquer animo desapaixonado, conhecerà sem duvida, em que consternaçaõ
se haviaõ de achar todas as classes deste Povo, muitos Cidadões
dezemparavaõ a patria, por naõ presenciarem a ruina della, outros punhaõ
em salvo as mulheres, e filhos, para naõ os exporem ao ludibrio dos
Soldados, outros internamente fremiaõ esperando o ponto da fatal
tragedia, e em todos jà naõ cabia lugar de mayor irritamento para tomar
qualquer resoluçaõ por fatal, e extrema, que fosse.

Estando as cousas nestes termos transportava-se por ordem do General
Commandante a artelharia da Cidade para se embarcar, e levar para o
Exercito na Provença; inuteis, como sempre, ficavaõ as representações,
que se faziaõ por parte do Governo; mas o Povo, jà enfurecido por tantos
motivos, naõ podia de nenhuma sorte tollerar, que se retirasse o que
conhecia preciso para sua defença, e vera Cidade, ficando desarmada,
exposta aos insultos de qualquer, que quizesse atacala.

Sucedeu pois, no dia 5 do corrente a tempo, que se transportava hum
grande morteiro para bombas, por hum dos principaes bairros, chamado
Protauria muito povoado, que se profundou com o grave pezu, a rua por
onde passava; os Officiaes Austriacos, que assistiaõ ao transporte,
quizeraõ por força obrigar alguns dos circunstantes a levantar a pezada
maquina, e como achàraõ repugnancia nelles, os maltrataraõ com pancadas,
acudio à tal violencia mayor numero de gente, e às pedradas afugentou os
ditos Officiaes, e Soldados, que foraõ obrigados a desempararem o
morteiro.

Irritado porèm o Povo da proxima injuria, e muito mais da excessiva, e
continua oppressaõ, em que se via, principiou a tomar aquelles
expedientes, que lhe suggeria a dezesperaçaõ; juntou-se hum grande
numero delles, transferiraõ-se de noute ao Palacio Ducal, e pediraõ
tumultuariamente com altas vozes, e por muitas horas, as armas; porèm o
Governo naõ só lhas negou constantemente, mas procurou com os meyos mais
efficazes de apasiguar no principio o tumulto, deputando ao tal intento
alguns Patricios para com a sua authoridade applacarem a furia do Povo,
sobre o qual sempre foy precizo, para tello afastado do Palacio, ordenar
às Guardas, que fizessem algumas descargas de fuzilaria.

Estes, e outros meyos, que se tomàraõ, haveriaõ talvez colhido algum
fruto se as contrarias idèas do Cõmandante General naõ os fizessem
inuteis. O Governo por meyo de hum Patricio informou o dito General na
mesma noute de 5. de todo o successo, para que entrasse na consideraçaõ
de quanto lhe era precizo moderar o seu genio; a mesma repres[~e]taçaõ
lhe foy repetida no dia successivo pelos dous Deputados ordinarios da
Rèpublica para persuadilo a naõ intentar cousa alguma de novo, e a
suspender o transporte da artilharia por naõ excitar mais a emoçaõ
popular, e principiar por este modo a pôr na Cidade o socego; porèm elle
entendeo, que naõ convinha.

Por tanto ordenou sem mais consideraçaõ, no mesmo dia 6. que hum
destacamento dos seus Granadeiros fosse a defender, e proseguir o
transporte da artilharia; porèm ficàraõ tambem estes rechasados, e tanto
se derramou o furor no Povo, que huma parte delle intentou expulsar das
Portas de Santo Thomàz, em que estavaõ aquartelados, os Austriacos, e
estes pelo contrario se adiantaraõ, e occupàraõ algumas emin[~e]cias
muito importantes dentro da mesma Cidade na rua chamada da agua verde, e
no bairro chamado de Priè.

Reforçava-se entretanto ocularmente o Povo, e depois de ter no dia 7.
posto alg[~u]as defensas cõtra as ditas eminencias, tornou outra vez a
pedir com mayor instancia, e resoluçaõ as armas, e denegando-as com
igual constancia o Governo, foy com tudo obrigado a aumentar
extraordinariamente as Guardas do publico Palacio, e por hum grosso
Piquete nos armazens das armas; porque muitos do Povo com escadas muito
altas, que tiràraõ das Igrejas, e outras partes, tinhaõ disposto a
entrada pelas janellas dos ditos armazens, porèm vendo frustrado o
intento, viraraõ-se a dar busca em todas as cazas da Cidade, e nas
logeas a donde se persuadiraõ achariaõ armas, e muniçoens de guerra;
forçàraõ os armazens da polvora, desarmàraõ alguns Postos de Tropas
regulares, que estavaõ na dita Cidade, occupáraõ varias baterias, e
transportàraõ em hum instante algumas peças de artilharia nos postos,
que erigiraõ cõtra as sobreditas eminencias, e principiou-se desta sorte
o fogo, que durou reciprocamente por muitas horas.

Naõ faltavaõ ao mesmo tempo os sobreditos Deputados do Governo em sempre
instar com o Comandante General para que concorresse de alguma sorte em
huma occasiaõ tam urgente a fazer uteis as diligencias, que o Governo
continuava para mitigar os espiritos revoltos do Povo; mas como elle naõ
julgou proprio dar reposta alguma positiva, faltou para este motivo o
meyo para conseguir o fim que se desejava.

O Povo, que se naõ julgava seguro jà das execuçoens militares, tantas
vezes intimadas, nem taõ pouco do rigor do General (caso que ficasse
superior) determinou pedir a entrega das Portas da Cidade, que
prezidiavaõ as Tropas Austriacas, e a desistencia do transporte da
artilharia, como meyos indispensaveis da sua manutençaõ, e defença, e o
Comandante General pelo contrario, naõ só denegava absolutamente este
indulto, mas tambem toda a moral cauçaõ; e menos se resolvia a explicar
por escrito atè donde chegariaõ as suas determinações.

Sem embargo disto, introduzio-se no dia seguinte 8. da manhãa huma
especie de armisticio, do qual, attento o Governo, se aproveitou para
renovar as suas diligencias, e ver se podia de algum modo evitar a ruina
eminente, ao mesmo intento, empenhou-se o Principe Doria, e varios
outros sogeitos proprios para semelhantes cazos; avistaraõ-se, e
persuadiraõ com toda a energia ao Comãdãte General, mas como o acharaõ
firme sempre na sua presistencia em naõ querer consentir no que pedia o
Povo, dando sempre respostas inconcludentes, e ambiguas sem nunca querer
dar por escrito nenhuma palavra, ficaraõ frustradas todas as
diligencias, e infructuoso qualquer tratado.

Chegou por fim o dia 10. em que o Povo (cujas forças jà estavaõ
summamente crescidas) naõ podendo admitir jà outros conselhos, que os da
propria defença, e cauçaõ, naõ só renovou a busca das armas, e das
muniçoens de guerra nas cazas particulares, mas violentou os depositos
publicos, e tomou por força a posse das milhores baterias, e daquellas
portas da Cidade, que ainda se guardavaõ das Tropas da Republica, de ahi
entrou nas Igrejas, fez que ao toque de sinos se convocassem todos os
habitantes de qualquer classe, e condiçaõ, que fossem, intimoulhe, pena
de vida, apparecessem armados nos respectivos lugares, que se lhe
destinàraõ; obrigou atè os mesmos Sacerdotes, e qualquer, que se achava
na Cidade a tomar as armas, e finalmente naõ se via em todas as partes,
cousa que naõ fosse hum impeto indomavel, e huma firme resoluçaõ, ou de
vencer, ou de morrer.

Durou com tudo por algumas horas do mesmo dia 10. o sobremencionado
armisticio, e se o Senhor Comandante General Marquêz Botta, tivesse
oportunamente adherido as instancias do Povo; podia com fundamento
esperar-se, que pararia esta torrente, mas como elle procurava só
dilações, e continuava no sistema de naõ concluir cousa alguma, acabou
de conduzir os animos atè ao ultimo extremo da desesperaçaõ, cujos
effeitos saõ dignos de seria ponderaçaõ, quando jà naõ tem outro
remedio.

Principiou-se da parte dos Austriacos imponderadamente o fogo de algumas
peças de artilharia, excitou-se a vista disto na plebe, hum furor
inexplicavel, logo acometeu com impavida resoluçaõ, duas horas antes do
meyo dia os sobreindicados postos importantes em [~q] as Tropas
Austriacas se tinhaõ fortificado dentro da Cidade, ficaraõ vencidos, e
fez prizioneiros os destacamentos, que os guardavaõ, e tomaraõ duas
peças de artilharia de Campanha, e dahi proseguindo com o mesmo calor,
assaltou as jà mencionadas Portas de Santo Thomàz, senhoreou-se dellas
em hum momento, e progredindo, sahio na Praça contingua chamada do
Principe Doria, na qual estava formado hum grosso de dous mil e
quinhentos Austriacos, que naõ podendo resistir ao grande impeto com que
foraõ acometidos na frente, e de outro destacamento que descia de huma
eminencia à dita Praça pelas espaldas, fogiraõ precipitadamente, e
perseguidos sempre com mais vigor, foraõ obrigados a dezemperar tambem
as segundas portas chamadas da Lanterna ao mesmo tempo que outro Piquete
de Paisanos, e Cidadões tinha restaurado o Bastiaõ jà nomeado de S.
Bento.

Restauradas deste modo as Portas da Cidade, e expulsos inteiramente
della os Austriacos, pareceo ao Povo haver bastantemente assegurada a
sua liberdade, por isso naõ cuidou mais em perseguillos, o que foy para
elles de grande fortuna, porque na mesma noute do dia 10. atè 11.
tiveraõ largo tempo de porem em salvo o thesouro que tinhaõ no exercito,
e de retirarem o restante das Tropas, as quaes deixando armazens, e
bagajem proseguiraõ com grande diligencia as suas marchas atè repassarem
a Boqueta, e restabelecerem o seu quartel General entre o Forte de Gavi,
e Cidade de Novi.

O desejo da liberdade, e os motivos da ira, e do temor como existiaõ
igualmente nos mais Povos das Comarcas vizinhas à Capital, extremamente
damnificadas do irregular modo das Tropas Austriacas, e expostas aos
inconvenientes, e perigos, que o succcesso na Cidade podia fazer cair
sobre ellas, as obrigou tambem a se assegurarem dos respectivos
destacamentos, que se achavaõ nos seus districtos.

Muy limitada foy a perda do Povo, porque em todas as acçoens, e ataques
naõ se contaõ 50. entre mortos, e feridos; os Austriacos padeceraõ muito
mais, porèm grande he o numero dos que ficaraõ prizioneiros, porque
excede de 4U. e tantos; com estes como com os doentes se tem visto, e se
vê o povo (ainda atendendo às insinuações mais vivas do Governo) com
toda a atençaõ possivel.

Como determinei de naõ entrar em huma relaçaõ distinta de todos os
successos para naõ ampliar demaziadamente a presente Carta, assim deixo
de apontar a V.m. os de menor entidade, como he o do botim dos Armazens,
a que concorreram atè as mulheres, e rapazes, como o das instancias, que
se fizeraõ contra as fazendas dos que se correspondiaõ com os Austriacos
como do saquo, [~q] se deu à caza de hum destes patricios, que na Terra
de Albaro procurou salvar hum Destacamento de Alemões, e como de outros
semelhantes factos, que na geral revoluçaõ de tanto povo se faziaõ
absolutamente inevitaveis.

Sò o que direi he que os Officiaes Austriacos, que ficàraõ prizioneiros,
como a mayor parte dos que ultimamente aqui se achavaõ, naõ cessaõ de
arguir, e condenar a conduta do seu Commandante, como a do Conde de
Chotek, a quem atribuem sem rebuço algum, os motivos da revoluçaõ
succedida.

Naõ posso explicar bastantemente a admiraçaõ, que me causou naquelle
dia, e que ainda me causa o ver que ao mesmo tempo, que a desesperaçaõ
soministrava as armas a este povo, elle com tudo seguindo as constantes
maximas do Governo, nunca cessou, nem cessa de exprimir com a mayor
veneraçaõ o respeito devido a S. Magestade Imperatriz Rainha, em cuja
magnanima integridade tanto fia, e espera, que quando ficar sinceramente
informada dos motivos, a que se deve atribuir esta sua extrema
resoluçaõ, se dignarà de reconhecer tambem os infortunios de huma Naçaõ
inteiramente constrangida a arriscar tudo para salvar o que he aos
homens grato mais neste mundo.

Finalmente como foy sempre grande, e he o obsequio, a fidelidade, e
filial amor destes póvos para o Serenissimo nosso Governo, assim
solemnemente protestaõ, que igual serà em todos os tempos o zelo, e
empenho delles para a sua conservaçaõ, que he o estimulo mais importante
dos disvelos, e dos cuidados communs, prontos para em qualquer occasiaõ,
e tempo dar disso as provas mais evid[~e]tes, e de derramar o sangue naõ
só pela conservaçaõ, e interesses da Republica, mas pela defença da
Patria, e da liberdade.

Taes saõ as expressoens dos meus Cidadões, e taes os successos, que me
obriguei relatar, V.m. formará delles aquelle recto juizo aos mesmos
correspondentes, e se todo o Mundo deve provavelmente interessarse a
favor de h[~u]a Republica que em meyo das suas desgraças se tem feita
digna de melhor fortuna, essa illustre Naçaõ serà distintamente
empenhada a lha procurar por todos os respeitos que naõ deixaraõ de se
lhes offerecerem diante dos olhos na contingencia presente, mas sobre
tudo deve ella esperala da Divina Providencia, que com especialidade
protege os opprimidos: tenho a honra de ser perfeitamente. Genova em 15.
de Dezembro de 1746.


De V.m.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Carta de hum cidadam de Genova a hum
seu correspondente em Londres, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORRESPONDENTE EM LONDRES ***

***** This file should be named 18528-8.txt or 18528-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/5/2/18528/

Produced by Rita Farinha and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by National
Library of Portugal (Biblioteca Nacional de Portugal).)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
