The Project Gutenberg EBook of Oração funebre recitada nas exequias do
Illm.^o e Exm.^o Sr. Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha, by Antonio Vasconcellos

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Oração funebre recitada nas exequias do Illm.^o e Exm.^o Sr. Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha

Author: Antonio Vasconcellos

Release Date: June 19, 2006 [EBook #18628]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ORAÇÃO FUNEBRE RECITADA NAS ***




Produced by Rita Farinha and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by National
Library of Portugal (Biblioteca Nacional de Portugal))









Oração Funebre Recitada nas Exequias do Illm.^o e Exm.^o Sr. Pedro
Alexandrino da Cunha.

por

Antonio Augusto Teixeira de Vasconcellos.

Loanda.
Imprensa do Governo.
1851.




Este é o juizo que pela boca da independencia profere para sempre a
verdade.

_Fr. Joaquim de Santa Clara. Arcebispo d'Evora. Oração funebre nas
Exequias do 1.^o Marquez de Pombal_.




ORAÇÃO FUNEBRE.


Senhores:--De quantas grandezas existem sobre a terra nenhuma é tão
solida e duradoira como a da virtude, e mais são muitas, são quasi
innumeraveis as poderosas circumstancias accidentaes a que o juizo dos
homens costuma ligar a idéa de grandeza.

Aqui a accumulação das riquezas exige os obsequios de todos; acolá a
casualidade do nascimento requer a geral veneração; n'uma parte a
elevada cathegoria do emprego demanda o publico respeito; n'outra o
valor nos feitos grandiosos da guerra ordena pela voz da fama, nem
sempre justa, a admiração universal: mas quando no livro da Providencia
se voltou a ultima pagina da vida do homem, quando para esses obsequios,
para essa veneração, para esse respeito, para essa universal admiração,
já não existe senão um cadaver, que em breve vae sumir-se na terra para
não tornar a apparecer, então levanta-se a razão publica, independente,
livre, e imparcialmente severa, a pezar em rigorosa balança o
merecimento do morto, e a ensaia-lo na legitima pedra de toque, para que
o verdadeiro oiro se separe da liga impura que lhe alterava o valor.

Neste processo em que não valem as astucias dos causidicos, em que é
inutil deprecar a benevolencia dos juizes, em que a interpretação das
leis não soffre as duvidas e contingencias do fôro, lavra-se a sentença
imparcial, que ou condemna o morto ao eterno esquecimento, e desprezo
dos vindoiros, ou lhe adjudica um nome glorioso, e a saudosa recordação
de todas as idades.

Não vale a grandeza do nascimento ao que se esqueceu de imitar as
virtudes dos seus maiores; não aproveita a accumulação das riquezas ao
que as não empregou honradamente; a qualificação do cargo publico não
salva o que nelle faltou aos seus deveres, e nas cuias da balança
poem-se de um lado a gloria militar, e lança-se na outra o sangue
derramado, as injustiças, as oppressões, e os crimes.

Só a reputação adquirida pelo exercicio constante da virtude, não tem a
descontar neste ultimo pleito nem os preconceitos dos homens, nem a
influencia do oiro, nem o pêzo da authoridade, nem a força das proprias
victorias, porque nenhuma dessas circumstancias accidentaes deu origem
ao honrado conceito que os contemporaneos legam á posteridade ácerca do
homem virtuoso.

A sentença que então se lavra é insuspeita e digna; os juizes
desapaixonados e rectos, porque naquelle tribunal respeitavel
levantam-se todas as vozes desassombradas de receio, livres de
dependencia, izentas de respeitos humanos, algumas vezes mesmo
desacompanhadas de caridade christã, como que para se desforçarem do
jugo que durante a vida lhes impoz aquelle, que nem sequer já póde
escuta-los.

Debalde a voz do Orador affeiçoado se levantaria a desculpar os defeitos
do morto, que mais alta que a sua, a voz da independencia, da razão, e
da verdade, despedaçaria junto ao feretro sepulchral o edificio da
lisonja, nem haveria voz que não balbuciasse perante os contemporaneos,
quando estes podessem bradar á posteridade--_mentira_--_mentira_!

Felizmente eu posso neste sanctuario erguer a voz livre de receio,
embora eu seja o menos qualificado para a nobre funcção com que me
honraram, embora me faltem todos os requisitos necessarios para poder
elevar-me á altura da minha missão, porque eu vou fallar de pessoa a
quem não podia ter affeição nem odio, porque me não foi dado conhec-êla,
e tambem porque as minhas vozes serão apenas o echo da opinião geral dos
habitantes desta Provincia, e principalmente dos moradores desta boa
Cidade, e eu préso muito esta occasião de pagar a larga divida de
reconhecimento em que lhes estou, servindo de interprete publico e
solemne dos seus mais intimos sentimentos, da sua mais justificada
saudade.

Na falta de merecimento proprio heide inspirar-me da idéa sublime que
vos reunio aqui, do santo respeito que leio em vossos semblantes, da
profunda magoa que respiram estas paredes luctuosas, e do honroso e
lugubre preito de homenagem á virtude, que significa toda esta festa
funebre.

O Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_, do Conselho de Sua Magestade,
Commendador das Ordens d'Aviz, e Torre e Espada do Valor, Lealdade, e
Merito, Capitão de Mar e Guerra, Governador Geral que foi desta
Provincia, e da de Macau, já não existe; e nem se quer podeis ter a
consolação de verter sobre o seu tumulo uma lagrima de saudade.

Esse elevado ataúde em que devia descançar o seu cadaver até que em
nossos braços fosse condusido á ultima morada, está vasio; e jazem a
muitas legoas das nossas praias, apenas cercados de um pequeno torrão de
terra portugueza, os restos do cidadão virtuoso, do administrador
honesto e probo, do chefe incorrupto e severo, do homem discreto e
grave, do patriota intelligente que vos governou durante o curto espaço
de tres annos; mas se falta ali o despojo mortal do vosso virtuoso
amigo, está nos corações de todos o elevado padrão que o representa, a
geral e publica saudade, a universal admiração pela sua constante
virtude, e o profundo respeito pela sua honrada memoria.

Dedicada assiduidade no cumprimento dos seus deveres, gravidade e
circumspecção no exercicio dos empregos publicos, inabalavel amor da
justiça e igual firmeza em administra-la, protecção desinteressada aos
desvalidos, cautelosa desconfiança dos poderosos, e igualdade severa em
attender a todos, honestidade sem a mais ligeira mácula, e modestia
exemplar, foram as qualidades que reunidas á vasta intelligencia que lhe
déra a natureza, e que elle cultivára com esmero, o fizeram respeitado e
grande em um e outro hemispherio, e ainda além do temeroso cabo a que em
tempos mais felizes trocámos o nome com espantosa previdencia do futuro.

Importa pouco saber se o Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_, pertencia á
classe da nobreza portugueza: as nove cunhas de oiro que illustram o
brazão da familia do Alferes-Mór de D. João I., não acrescentariam uma
folha sequer aos immarcessiveis loiros da sua gloria, nem o exemplo de
nobilissimos ascendentes poderia impôr-lhe maiores obrigações, do que as
que seu honrado pae lhe legou morrendo em Argel de feridas recebidas em
combate com os moiros, quando ainda faltavam alguns mezes para o
nascimento de seu filho[1].

O Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_, aceitou corajosa e dedicadamente
este legado paterno de servir a patria, e de morrer por ella; e
cumprio-o com espantosa perseverança.

A sua vida foi desde os primeiros annos votada inteiramente ao serviço
do Estado, já preparando o seu espirito com assiduos e convenientes
estudos em que todos o admiraram, já escolhendo uma nobre profissão, da
qual são socios inseparaveis os trabalhos mais rudes, as mais improbas
fadigas; e com effeito, os incompletos dez lustros da sua laboriosa
existencia foram passados nas mais trabalhosas commissões do serviço
publico[2].

Apenas entrado nos primeiros postos do Exercito, abrio-se-lhe largo
ensejo de mostrar as suas propensões politicas, a capacidade do seu
espirito, a extensão, e utilidade do seu prestimo e valia.

A liberdade acenou-lhe do alto daquelle rochedo heroico em que depois de
desastrosos acontecimentos se apinhavam os seus bravos defensores, e o
Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_, já estava na Ilha Terceira quando o
filho mais moço do Imperador e Rei acabava apenas de sentar-se no Throno
de Portugal[3].

Ali como Official de Infanteria, e depois como Official da Armada,
mostrou em arriscadas commissões para quanto o habilitavam a escolha dos
seus estudos, a seriedade de seu caracter, e a sua infatigavel
actividade[4]; e desde esse tempo até ir com o Duque de Bragança cravar
nas praias do Mindêlo o estandarte da liberdade portugueza, pôde por tal
fórma provar o muito para que era, que nas continuas e indispensaveis
lutas da nossa difficil reconstrucção politica, nenhum governo pôde
dispensar os seus serviços, nenhuma consideração aconselhou nunca que o
afastassem dos negocios publicos, porque o Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da
Cunha_, era mais patriota que partidario, mais homem do seu paiz do que
homem das facções[5].

Quasi estranho ás nossas dissenções civís vivia para os melhoramentos
uteis, para os grandes pensamentos praticos, sem os quaes não ha
civilisação possivel; e naquella alma, que o fogo das paixões politicas
não consumira, vegetavam com a virgindade da primeira florescencia o
amor da Patria, o dezejo do engrandecimento e respeito do nome
portuguez, o infatigavel ardor pela realisação dos melhoramentos
materiaes, e uma certa moralidade catoniana que passaria por fabulosa se
vós todos a não testemunhasseis, se este acto grandioso e sublime não
fosse a prova mais indisputavel desta profunda verdade.

Vós, que o conhecestes entregue aos curiosos e difficeis trabalhos do
exame e exploração da costa do sul de Benguella, e empregado na
repressão de um trafico illicito, que os habitos inveterados, e a falta
de boa direcção administrativa faziam parecer impossivel evitar, trafico
que a philosophia e a humanidade condemnam, e que o proprio interesse
commercial começa hoje a considerar insensato e ruinoso; vós, que o
vistes commandando a Estação Naval, e organisando estabelecimentos uteis
e indispensaveis, a cuja creação se não abalançára a previdencia e zêlo
das primeiras auctoridades da Provincia, direis que ninguem poderia vir
balbuciar uma accusação aos pés deste feretro, murmurar uma pequena
queixa que possa embaciar o lustre de tão honrada memoria[6].

Mal repousava destes trabalhos, e da penosa commissão que o levára ás
praias da Bahia, aonde a sua firmeza e prudencia foram dignas do antigo
nome portuguez, e já a confiança do Governo abria um campo mais dilatado
ao incansavel espirito do Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_, nomeando-o
Governador Geral desta Provincia[7].

Era honroso o encargo de governar tão bella possessão, mas era dificil
pela conjunctura de transição commercial violenta, e não preparada, mais
difficil pelas más praticas que era forçoso desarreigar, difficilimo
finalmente pelos illustres predecessores, que honram a extensa lista dos
Capitães Generaes do Reino d'Angola[8].

Que animo não tremeria de desembarcar nas praias conquistadas por _Paulo
Dias de Novaes_ para cingir a nobre espada de _Salvador Corrêa_, para
succeder a _Manoel da Cerveira Pereira_, o conquistador de Benguella, a
_João Fernandes Vieira_, e a _André Vidal de Negreiros_, heroicos
deffensores do Brazil contra os hollandezes, a _D. Francisco Innocencio
de Souza Coutinho_, a quem esta Colonia deve os seus principaes
estabelecimentos publicos, e a creação de estudos superiores que são
ainda hoje objecto da saudade de todos os homens intelligentes, para
succeder emfim ao _Conde de Porto Santo_, a D. _Miguel Antonio de
Mello_, aos _Almeidas_, aos _Vasconcellos_, aos _Menezes_, e aos
_Tavoras_?

Conhecia-o bem o Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_, e soube pôr tal
esforço e constancia em desempenhar tão elevada missão, que o seu
governo será contado sempre entre os que mais concorreram para a
felicidade desta Provincia.

Talvez não eram passadas vinte e quatro horas desde que começára a
governar, e já a principal fonte da receita publica estava
providentemente entregue á vasta intelligencia, e recta severidade de um
mancebo, cuja perda ainda ha pouco chorámos, e que foi já reunir-se com
elle na morada dos justos[9].

A organisação das pautas[10], a subordinação dos empregados
discolos[11], a reforma do Terreiro[12], o regulamento das Cadeias[13],
o fomento da cultura do algodão, e o do aproveitamento das mais plantas
uteis e medicamentosas que vegetam e crescem espontaneamente no solo
d'Africa[14], a plantação de arvores[15], o aceio da Cidade[16], o
cuidado de preservar a tropa da chuva e dos ardores do sol[17], as
estradas[18], a instrucção publica[19], e finalmente a creação da
Imprensa, primeiro elemento de civilisação material e moral[20],
mereceram logo a sua mais minuciosa attenção, e os documentos officiaes
do seu governo mostram um certo movimento civilisador, administrativo, e
até certo ponto artistico e professional, que a Provincia nunca
presenciára.

E o homem que lançou nesta terra os primeiros fundamentos da
administração publica, que procurou dar ao commercio uma direcção util
para as grandes emprezas agricolas e industriaes, que descia com igual
aptidão das mais intrincadas questões de um direito administrativo
indefinido, e mais consuetudinario que legal, ao detido exame dos
trabalhos do artista, do maquinista, do agricultor, o homem cuja
gravidade bastou sem grandes correcções a moralisar completamente todas
as repartições do Estado, e cuja prudencia e rectidão admiraram os
proprios estrangeiros a ponto de o fazerem constar perante quem nunca
achára senão motivos para o louvar e engrandecer nos seus Decretos[21];
era ao mesmo tempo de uma espantosa simplicidade nas exigencias externas
da grandeza, e de uma exemplarissima modestia.

O Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_, não pôde no curto espaço do seu
governo levar ao cabo muitos dos generosos pensamentos de civilisação, e
de desenvolvimento material e moral que meditava, e não lhe faltaram
nesse periodo aquellas penosas atribulações que são o apanagio certo dos
cargos mais elevados.

As lutas civis de Portugal arrojaram a estas praias em situação bem
lamentavel caracteres illustres, camaradas seus, e talvez... de certo
amigos e companheiros de combates, de perigos, e de gloria. Vinha entre
elles o Chefe do Estado Maior de Sua Magestade Imperial o Duque de
Bragança[22].

O Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_, sem desviar-se da proverbial
severidade com que comprehendia o serviço publico, soube, quanto lhe era
permittido, haver-se no cumprimento das suas obrigações por tal maneira,
que foi uma das victimas dessa triste desventura, quem vos convidou a
orar hoje neste Templo pela alma daquelle illustre finado[23].

Amarga conjunctura para o Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_; prova
durissima ainda para um coração que podesse ser indifferente á
infelicidade dos seus nobres camaradas.

Ao cabo de tres annos entregou ao seu digno successor o governo desta
Provincia, deixando apenas traçadas as primeiras linhas da administração
e das reformas uteis, que tendes visto continuar a travez de graves
difficuldades, pelo simultaneo esforço de empregados dignissimos.

Estas circumstancias, e sobretudo a inabalavel e rara honestidade na
administração da justiça, no provimento dos empregos, na concessão dos
auxilios e protecção do governo, levaram a tão alto gráo a sua
reputação, que esta Cidade o honrou com a mais solemne e saudosa
despedida, de que ha recordação nos annaes desta Provincia; e o
respeitavel Corpo Municipal ainda saudou a sua memoria, quando pela
primeira vêz teve de dirigir-se ao illustre General, que de tão puras
mãos recebêra as rédeas do governo[24].

Objecto do publico respeito, honrado com a saudade de todos, o Sr.
_Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_, deixou as praias de Loanda legando aos
seus successores o elevado encargo de corresponder á confiança do
governo, ás esperanças da Provincia, e á honradissima recordação de tão
distincto funccionario.

Em reconhecimento dos seus extraordinarios serviços, é que ás
distincções com que o honrára o governo, veio associar-se aquella a que
o Imperador ligára os nobres epithetos de valor, lealdade e merito.
Appropriado ornamento para um peito de tanto valor, para animo de
tamanha lealdade, para coração de tão grande merito[25].

A dedicação que o fizera martyr do serviço publico desde os primeiros
annos, não consentiu que repousasse um instante depois de tantas
fadigas, e o governo sollicitando-o á Camara aonde o levára o voto
unanime do collegio elleitoral desta Provincia, quando já a não
governava, mandou-o ás praias do Rio de Janeiro, aonde uma cruel
fatalidade devia fazer passar a sua alma por bem amargas provações, que
talvez apressaram o termo daquella preciosa existencia, quando em outra
mais distante e atribulada possessão portugueza, começavam a sentir-se
os effeitos da sua consummada prudencia, e extrema capacidade[26].

Senhores, se o cidadão virtuoso, o funccionario probo, o administrador
incansavel, já não existe, se lhe faltam estatuas ou padrões que
perpetuem a sua memoria, se o interprete de vossos sentimentos hoje é
demasiado debil para que a sua voz eccôe nas idades futuras, eu vejo
mais que tudo isso nesta publica, solemne, e espontanea demonstração, no
testemunho constante que daes das suas virtudes, na inextinguivel
saudade, que tendes nobremente patenteado.

A _Duarte Pacheco_ que morreu á mingoa n'um hospital, ninguem levantou
estatua: não ha uma recordação monumental de _Salvador Corrêa_, mas de
paes a filhos passa veneranda, e respeitada a memoria destes grandes
varões.

Como a respeito delles vós direis a vossos irmãos, aos vossos amigos, a
todos quantos abordarem ás praias desta boa Cidade, as qualidades do
vosso chorado Chefe: haveis de mostrar-lhes pela narração de seus
feitos, o esplendor das suas virtudes publicas, o brilho da sua austera
probidade, o lustre da sua proverbial rectidão; e a primeira oração que
ensinardes a vossos filhos, será sem duvida dizendo-lhes com tão
justificada saudade:

_Oremos pelo descanço eterno do Sr. Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha,
Governador Geral que foi desta Provincia_.




Notas:

[1] O Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_ nasceu em Outubro de 1801, filho
legitimo de D. _Rita Tiburcia da Costa_, e do 1.^o Tenente da Armada,
_Jacinto Peres da Cunha_, que fallecêra poucos mezes antes em Argel das
feridas mortaes que recebera dos moiros na occasião em que por elles foi
tomada a fragata _Cisne_, onde se achava embarcado.

Necrologia pelo Illm.^o Sr. _S. J. da Luz_, Official Maior da Secretaria
de Estado dos Negocios da Marinha e Ultramar: Diario do Governo n.^o 233
de 3 de Outubro de 1850.

[2] Falleceu com quazi quarenta e nove annos de idade.--Necrologia
citada etc.

[3] Alferes annexo ao Estado maior do Exercito em 22 de Março de
1821.--Ordem do dia n.^o 55 de 28 do sobredito mez: Tenente de
Infanteria 13 em 9 de Julho de 1827.--Ordem do dia n^o 90.--A Fragata
brasileira _Izabel_ em fins de Setembro de 1828 deitou na Ilha Terceira
a primeira porção de Officiaes entre os quaes se contava o Sr. _Pedro
Alexandrino da Cunha_.--Necrologia citada etc.

[4] Foi na Ilha Terceira incumbido da reparação do Castello de S. João
Baptista do Monte Brazil, e da direcção de uma Imprensa. Passou para a
Armada a rogos do Governo em 2^o Tenente em 25 de Fevereiro de 1831, e
servio a bordo do brigue-escuna _Liberal_, na expedição ás Ilhas de
Oeste, e commandou depois as escunas, _Prudencia e Terceira_.--Necrologia
citada.

[5] Vide a citada Necrologia.

[6] Creou um Arsenal na Ilha de Loanda.--Necrologia citada.

[7] O Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_, sahio de Lisboa na corveta _D.
Izabel Maria_, em 9 de Dezembro de 1836, passou a Cabo Verde, e a
Pernambuco, foi á Bahia em auxilio dos subditos portuguezes, e tocando
no Rio de Janeiro para se prover de mantimentos, seguio viagem para a
Costa de Africa. Voltou ao Reino em 1841: foi eleito Deputado por S.
Thomé e Principe e tomou assento em 3 de Janeiro de 1843, e sendo pedido
á Camara sahio de novo para Angola a bordo da corveta _Urania_ em 27 de
Abril do mesmo anno.--Promovido a Capitão de Fragata em 14 de Fevereiro
da 1844 foi nomeado Governador Geral da Provincia de Angola em 31 de
Maio de 1845, tomando posse a 6 de Setembro do mesmo anno.

[8] Sem pertender tirar o louvor a quem o mereça é forçoso confessar que
os Capitães Generaes fiseram o que ha de bom e util na Provincia, os
Governadores tem feito muito pouco, quasi nada comparativamente. Tambem
faltam-lhes os recursos que sobravam então.

[9] O Bacharel em direito _Euzebio Catella de Lemos Pinheiro Falcão_,
natural de Angola, Cavalleiro de Christo e Commissario portuguez na
Commissão mixta, foi nomeado Administrador interino da Alfandega por
portaria de 7 de Setembro de 1845 pelo Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino_ no dia
immediato ao da sua posse de Governador Geral. Era um mancebo de grande
merito: morreu em Janeiro deste anno quasi repentinamente. Foi o
reformador da Alfandega.

[10] A Portaria de 17 de Setembro de 1845 (Bolelim n.^o 3 de 27 de
Setembro do mesmo anno) creou uma Commissão para este fim.

[11] Portaria de 30 de Setembro de 1845 (Boletim supplemento ao n.^o 3)

[12] Portaria de 8 de Outubro de 1845 (Boletim n.^o 5 de 11 de Outubro)
creando a Commissão.

[13] Portaria de 16 de Outubro de 1845 (Boletim n.^o 6 de 18 de Outubro)
creando a Commissão.

[14] Circular aos Chefes em 14 de Outubro de 1845 (Boletim n.^o 7 de 25
do mesmo mez) Circular para Benguella e Presidios e Districtos em 17 do
mesmo (Boletim idem) Officio de 23 do mesmo mez ao Chefe de Muxima
(Boletim n.^o 8 do 1.^o de Novembro) etc.

[15] Officio ao Director do Trem em 27 de Outubro (Boletim n.^o 9 de 8
de Novembro) Officio á Camara de Loanda de 30 de outubro (Boletim idem).

[16] Estão cheios os Boletins de recommendações e ordens a este
respeito, afóra as que dava pessoalmente todos os dias. Loanda póde
attribuir ao Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_ uma grande parte da sua
actual salubridade.

[17] Officio ao Commandante da Policia de 17 de Novembro (Boletim n.^o
15 de 20 de Setembro) e muitas outras providencias.

[18] Ordem á força armada n.^o 23 de 14 de Março de 1846 (Boletim n.^o
27 do mesmo dia) etc.

[19] Portaria de 23 de Abril de 1846 (Boletim n.^o 33 de 25 do mesmo
mez.)

[20] O Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_ tomou posse a 6 de Setembro, e o
1.^o Boletim foi publicado a 13 do mesmo mez.

[21] Portaria de 12 de Outubro de 1846 (Boletim em supplemento ao n.^o
73 de 31 de Janeiro de 1847) disendo que o Ministro britannico em Lisboa
manifestára de ordem do seu Governo a sua satisfação pelo zelo e
exforços empregados para a suppressão do trafico da escravatura, segundo
informára o Capitão _Mansell_ Commandante da Esquadra britannica na
Costa Occidental de Africa aos Lords do Almirantado.

[22] O Exm.^o Sr. _Conde de Bomfim_, prisioneiro na batalha de Torres
Vedras.

[23] O Illm.^o Sr. _José Herculano Ferreira de Horta_, Major do
Exercito, Presidente da Irmandade militar de Santa Cruz, e da Commissão
encarregada de celebrar as exequias.

[24] Vide a Necrologia citada.

[25] A Commenda da Torre e Espada que lhe foi dada quando chegou a
Lisboa.

[26] O Sr. _Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha_, foi pela segunda vez levado á
Camara dos Deputados em 1849 por esta Provincia. Commandou a náu _Vasco
da Gama_, cujo sinistro á entrada do Rio de Janeiro é bem conhecido, e
tendo sido assasinado em Macau o Governador _João Maria Ferreira do
Amaral_ seu particular amigo, foi nomeado para o substituir. Ali morreo
de um ataque de colera ás 3 horas e meia da tarde de 6 de Julho de 1850
tendo tomado posse do Governo a 26 de Maio do mesmo anno. Vide a
Necrologia citada.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Oração funebre recitada nas exequias
do Illm.^o e Exm.^o Sr. Pedro Alexandrino da Cunha, by Antonio Vasconcellos

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ORAÇÃO FUNEBRE RECITADA NAS ***

***** This file should be named 18628-8.txt or 18628-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/6/2/18628/

Produced by Rita Farinha and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by National
Library of Portugal (Biblioteca Nacional de Portugal))


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

