The Project Gutenberg EBook of Garatujas, by Joaquim de Melo Freitas

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Garatujas

Author: Joaquim de Melo Freitas

Release Date: February 15, 2007 [EBook #20582]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GARATUJAS ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano (Transcrito a partir das imagens
disponibilizadas pela Biblioteca Digital da Ria-BibRia)







*GARATUJAS*

por

*Mello Freitas*


Bacharel formado em direito, Socio correspondente da Sociedade de
Geographia de Lisboa, Socio fundador da Associação dos Jornalistas e
Escriptores portugueses e mais nada.


      Tem versos naturaes, parecem prosa!
          Bocage (Sonetos).


AVEIRO

IMPRENSA COMMERCIAL
Rua de José Estevam.

1883

     *     *     *     *     *




*Voz no deserto.*


João de Deus é incontestavelmente o nosso primeiro lyrico.

Homem que acredita em Deus para não ser um João "Ninguem" que, nas
vesperas d'uma epedemia, caiou d'alto abaixo a povoação inteira de
Messines, e que no remanso d'alma inventou com affecto um methodo racional
de leitura para alegria e allivio das creanças, qual outro mais
apaixonado, de maior delicadeza e tão mavioso?

Atraz d'elle grasnou por largo espaço de tempo um rancho de patos n'uma
vozeria medonha imitando-lhe a belleza das rimas, e a estructura da
phrase.

A "Morte de D. João" de Guerra Junqueiro produziu de subito um cataclysmo
como se se rasgassem as entranhas da terra e uma cratera se abrisse
vomitando a lava em rolos de fumo. Todos se julgaram n'esse instante com
direito a molharem o pincel nas côres iriadas de tão esplendida palheta,
esboçaram por isso com as mesmas tintas os perniciosos fructos do lupanar,
cantaram o mercurio, a copahiba e a syphilis, esfalfaram as pluraes dos
adjectivos, evocaram a desditosa Ophelia, obrigaram Christo a marchar em
todas as linhas das suas estrophes, e finalmente prenderam a cotovia entre
alexandrinos caudalosos com os epithetos mais extravagantes bebidos na
leitura da opulenta prosa de Flaubert, Zola, e Daudet.

Na esteira phosphorescente do sublime trecho de Soares Passos--"O
firmamento"--muitos outros gonfaloneiros da poesia scientifica tem
actualmente interrogado o mysterio e a duvida, hasteando um labaro de
perguntas mais causticas do que um emplasto de mostarda, pimenta e
cantharidas.

O plagiato é o grande affluente, que assopra as vagas empoladas da
litteratura.

Vou por certo, estuando e redemoinhando, entre os cachões d'aquelles que
não inventam, mas imitam, e hoje que os maiores poetas do nosso paiz arfam
dentro de encadernações luxuosas, e gemem em papel velino, no bello typo
renascença as suas endechas mais subtis e trascendentes, para me affastar
d'elles, e lhes não manchar a chlamyde guerreira, se obedecesse aos
impulsos do meu merecimento devia gravar o escalracho dos meus sonetos,
carregados de lepra, na casca doente dos platanos ou imprimil-os, quando
muito, em papel pardo. Esta confidencia é talvez esteril, mas urgente.

      31 de dezembro de 1882.

      *Mello Freitas*




*No Passeio Publico*


      A charanga transuda uma _gavotte_:
      Dois caturras discutem acirrados,
      E com bengalas corneas d'estoque
      Vibram politica em medonhos brados;

      Um coronel solemne, um D. Quichotte
      Exige a continencia d'uns soldados,
      E trauteando a polka da Mascotte
      Giram damas a passos alquebrados;

      As _lorettes_ com artes de raposa
      Perseguem os alferes; conjecturo
      Que não seja talvez p'ra boa cousa.

      Finalmente um burguez, nedio, maduro
      Ri do estado inter'ssante de sua esposa
      Porque se julga o pae do nascituro.




*Forget me not.*

(não me esqueças)


      Não te esqueço, florinha humilde e bella
      Que tornas a campina um firmamento,
      Innocente, sublime bagatella,
      Joia viva, risonho monumento.

      Não sei que poesia encontro n'ella,
      Que instilla em roda ethereo, vago alento
      Tão breve, tão discreta, tão singela,
      Qual pyrilampo, o nitido portento.

      N'essa titilação fosforescente,
      Lagrima-esmalte da urze tão subtil,
      Abrandas as escarpas da torrente

      Mensageira do lascivo mez de abril
      Quem te não ama, o coração não sente
      Miniatura com petalas d'anil!




*Vendetta*


      Juraste a minha perdição, ingrata,
      A quem adóro como adóro a vida
      Casta flôr, flôr de neve estremecida,
      Que sorris, quando o teu olhar me mata.

      Gravei no peito aquella rubra data
      Em que te vi, amor! qual na avenida
      Se entalha na fiel casca endurcida
      O nome da huri, que nos maltracta

      E, apesar de seres tão bella e mansa,
      Folgas que a desventura me persiga
      Dilacerado de cruel esp'rança.

      Seja assim! É atroz minha vingança,
      Pois que amôr e odio tanto me castiga,
      Cada vez te amo mais, dôce inimiga.




*Desditosa cecem!*


      Pobre flôr, que se estiola
      Na vertente da montanha,
      Ninguem aqui te consola
      Fria sombra te acompanha.

      Commoção que te desola!
      Uma peçonhenta aranha
      Sobre a nitida corolla
      A sua rede emmaranha!

      Quem te lançou no degredo
      D'este acerbo pavimento
      Para te olvidar tão cêdo?

      --A meus paes fugi mesquinha
      Fugi nas azas do vento
      Triste sorte foi a minha!...




*O Marquez de Pombal*


      _Le Roi Faineant_ cerrará os olhos
      E partira entre nuvens para o ceu
      Surge, depois, na côrte um escarceu
      Que brame da vingança nos escolhos

      D'altas vagas de bronze nos refolhos
      Poz a Intriga um galeão como trofeu
      A effigie de Pombal tinha em labeu
      Jaz na poeira, no olvido, e nos abrolhos.

      Então a Inveja alastra a baba escura
      Qual serpente, que as roscas ennovela
      E a empreza do ministro transfigura.

      Entretanto o Marquez com amargura
      Diz fitando a grosseira caravella:
      --_Lá te vaes Portugal agora á véla._--




*Abandonado!*


      Uma fita prendi côr de saphira
      No leve, tenue pé d'uma andorinha;
      Este anno regressou a pobresinha
      E junto ao ninho seu constante gira.

      Quando o sol no horisonte se retira
      Esvoaça em redor de mim sósinha;
      Tambem esta alma, soffrega, mesquinha
      Por ti enfeitiçada geme, expira.

      Ella na espuma branca, qual arminho
      Foge no mar á raiva dos açores
      Não perdendo a lembrança do seu ninho

      Só tu na primavera dos amores,
      Como vibora occulta em rosmaninho,
      De mim te olvidas na estação das flôres.




*Garibaldi*

(Fallecido a 1 de junho de 1882.)


      É morto o _condottiere_, o paladino
      Soldado da rasão e da justiça
      Forasteiro, que o sangue desperdiça
      Nas refregas do tragico destino.

      Genio do bem, suave e peregrino
      Estatua de luz e amor toda massiça
      A cujo aspecto a multidao submissa
      Se agrupa em alvoroço repentino,

      Guerrilheiro da America indomavel
      Espada de Dijon, e da Marsalla,
      De Napoles e Roma inconsolavel!

      O solitario de Caprera é morto,
      E, quando o heroe no tumulo resvala,
      Um calafrio gela o mundo absorto.




*Imprecação*


      Para que te amava eu? Corpo d'espuma
      Cruel enlevo de labios setinosos
      Onde bailam desejos luminosos
      Estrella, que de luz o ceu perfuma.

      Para que te amava eu? Que densa bruma
      Me offusca de saudade em tons nervosos
      Desfolhando com gritos lacrimosos
      As petalas d'amôr uma por uma?

      Para que te amava eu? oh! praza aos ceus
      Que em quanto o sol girar pelo universo
      Naufragues da paixão nos escarceus.

      E porque soffro na tristeza immerso,
      Pallido goivo ao pé dos mausoleus,
      Oxalá que o amôr te seja adverso!




*O terremoto*


      Com fragor açoitando a vaga escura,
      O temporal irado, espumacento
      Cavalga um perfido corcel--o vento--
      Que solta gargalhadas de bravura.

      Treme a terra, e com horrida figura,
      Como Athlante, sacóde o turvo argento;
      Nos gonzos oscillando o pavimento,
      Dançam torres no assomo da loucura.

      Vae o fogo alastrando o aureo manto,
      As ruinas trucidam fugitivos,
      Que sangrentos se abraçam convulsivos!

      --O que fazer?--inquire o rei em pranto,
      O ministro lhe diz com nobre espanto:
      --_Sepultar mortos, e cuidar dos vivos._--




*Entre palmeiras*


      Faiscam os jaezes dos Cavallos,
      Vibra o som dos clarins pela athmosphera;
      No dorso de elephantes reverbéra
      A seda e prata em crebros intervallos.

      Rodeado de innumeros vassallos
      Intrepido radjah de côr austera
      Busca o tigre e leão, onça e panthera
      Crusando as selvas, e galgando os vallos.

      No cerrado paul ondula a brenha
      E um leão de medonha, hirsuta juba
      Em furioso valor se desentranha.

      A raiva dos lebreus o estimula,
      Os dardos o trespassam, mas derruba
      O radjah, que nas vascas estrangula.




*Nostalgia*


      Nos estuarios alpestres do Brasil,
      Onde o sol inflammado resplandece,
      A cabilda dos negros desfallece
      Sob o látego torpe e mercantil.

      Nas areias matisa-se febril
      O ouro virgem, e no spatho permanece
      O diamante, que arisco se aborrece
      Entre o cascalho estupido, imbecil.

      O escravo, quando avista um diamante
      De dezesete _carats_ quebra fôrro
      As algemas sorrindo triumphante.

      Que me valeu porém o descobrir-te
      Diamante sem rival?--Suspiro e môrro
      A teus pés almejando possuir-te.




*No confissionario*


      D'um frade libidino e bronzeado
      Ortego desenhou o rosto bento,
      Grave ausculta no sexto mandamento
      Uma joven do seculo passado;

      Fascinada respira o ar mesclado
      Das lascivas perguntas de convento,
      Que se aproveitam do veloz momento
      Galopando na senda do peccado.

      A pobre flôr arqueja palpitante
      Sob esse olhar, que vae como despil-a
      Mystico, corrompido e triumphante.

      E na cruz soffredor, agonisante,
      Mudo Christo de velha e tosca argila
      Pasma da habilidade do farçante!




*Boletim militar*

_1814_


      Vae rir-se desdenhosa a sombra de _Pombal_!
      Era doida a rainha. O principe regente
      Ostentando gentil a bochêcha eloquente
      Tinha bom appetite e ventre clerical,

      Mas logo que Junot açaima Portugal
      Embarca a toda a pressa e deixa a nossa gente,
      Panda véla o conduz ao Brasil florescente,
      E rapido imagina um plano theatral.

      Veloz como no monte a trepida gazella,
      É certo resguardava a insipida pessoa
      Adiposa e feliz para cingir a c'rôa,

      E da nação em prol tão lorpa se revela,
      Que nomeia coronel do exercito á cautela
      O Santo Thaumaturgo Antonio de Lisboa.




*Taborda*


      Taborda, altivo heroe da gargalhada,
      Que dominas no palco com bravura,
      Quando vier sobre ti a morte escura,
      Hade sentir-se humilde, deslumbrada.

      E rindo a vez primeira enthusiasmada,
      Desfranzindo a medonha catadura,
      Ao vêr-te e ouvir-te em alegria pura,
      Despedaça a féra clava ensanguentada.

      Como subjugas cauto a morte ingrata,
      Vences tambem risonho a dúctil alma
      D'esta multidão gélida, pacata.

      E Satan abysmado diz em calma:
      --Sim?!... Mais almas do que eu elle arrebata?
      Já Diabo não sou!... Leva-me a palma.--




*Antonio Pedro*


      Antonio Pedro, astro fulgurante
      Que cruzas do tablado a vasta senda
      Como guerreiro impavido da lenda,
      Que, em busca de proesas, vaga errante.

      Eil o cingindo as armas de diamante!
      Sem que o cansaço, ou vil temor o prenda,
      Cada vez mais se engolfa na contenda,
      Em prol da esquiva fama alti-sonante.

      Quando o veu do futuro descortino
      No alcáçar da justiça, que rebrilha
      Sabeis o que descubro, e vaticino?

      (Isto me pasma! transporta! e maravilha!)
      Votado a berço humilde p'lo destino
      Filho do povo,--a _Gloria_--te perfilha!




*Mysterioso abysmo*


      Tepido sonho de luz
      corpo, que destila aroma
      sublime e claro axioma
      espargindo amor a flux!

      Uma vertigem produz
      teu olhar, o seio, a côma,
      voluptuoso symptoma
      que a phantasia traduz.

      Debil flôr, que o sol admira
      beijando com azedume
      as estrellas de saphira...

      mas ninguem sequer presume
      que o meu coração expira
      na mortalha do ciume.




*Na floresta*


      Conversa nos abetos a bafagem,
      Nas franças range o vento compassado
      E á matilha esquivando-se um veado
      Pasma de vêr no bréjo a sua imagem.

      Que rumor tão subtil, que doce agrado,
      Poesia terna e perfida, selvagem,
      Em que os echos se arrastam na folhagem
      Entre doceis de musgo avelludado.

      Irrompem as gazellas nos aceiros
      E as cobras apparecem na giesta
      Quando as gralhas alagam os olmeiros.

      Triste como o silencio da floresta,
      Oiço dentro de mim uivos d'horror.
      Combatem dois leões--_Ciume e Amor!_




*O cão de bordo*


      A cerração é densa. O pobre hiate
      Sem leme desarvóra na refrega;
      Penetra na escotilha a onda céga,
      Alquebra-se o baixel no duro embate.

      A trovoada estala, a prôa abate;
      No escaler a maruja ao ceu se apéga,
      Este a vida infeliz surdo lhe nega,
      Que as lagrimas não bastam p'ra resgate!...

      Um cão hirsuto, magro, avermelhado,
      Com os olhos chorosos, flamejantes,
      Que brilham como negros diamantes

      Late com desespero, busca a nado,
      Mergulha entre os cadaveres boiantes,
      O dono encontra, e morre extenuado.




*No harem*


      No matiz do tapete auri-felpudo
      Haydé reclina as fórmas langorosas,
      Scismam d'inveja purpurina as rosas
      Admirando-lhe as faces de velludo.

      Modelo, que convida a obsceno estudo
      N'um desmaio entre gazes vaporosas
      P'las cassoulas de prata sumptuosas
      O ambar, o beijoim arde a miudo.

      Quando rompe nos ceus a madrugada
      Sentem-se beijos em lascivo espasmo
      Que illuminam a alcôva perfumada

      E um eunucho--decrepito sarcasmo!--
      Que a barbacã vigia na esplanada,
      Crê-se na terra um mero pleonasmo.




*Esculptura*


      Que bella estatua! Collo d'alabastro,
      Um riso de crystal, faces ardentes,
      Um adreço de perolas os dentes
      E os olhos chispam o fulgor d'um astro!

      De maus intentos o porvir alastro
      Porque passando desdenhosa sentes,
      Que intimidas com lividas correntes
      Quem doido beija o sulco do teu rastro.

      Paradoxo cruel! treva d'arminho,
      Idolo deslumbrante, ruim creança
      Que da ternura forjas sevo espinho!

      Quando te vejo occorre-me a lembrança,
      Flôr de gelo, sinistro rosmaninho,
      D'enforcar-me a sorrir na tua trança.




*Cavatina*

(Palavras ditas entre bastidores a uma corista)


      Tenho ideias com-_fusas_ e geladas
      Sobre a _escala_ do amor onde resplende
      _Lá_ n'esse vivo _sol_, que mais se accende
      _Rallentando_ as promessas calculadas.

      A _gamma_ dos suspiros não attende,
      É de mau _tom_ possuir lindas manadas
      D'amantes, que se _afinam_ nas ciladas
      Das _pausas_, que o desejo não entende.

      Algumas joias quiz com ar guapo
      E a _compasso_ dos negros agiotas
      Outras requer n'um prodigo--_dá capo_.

      Morre-se--diz o _adagio_--d'alegria
      Portanto se eu pagasse em boas _notas_
      Expiravamos ambos d' ... _harmonia_.




*No theatro anatomico*


      Sobre a meza de marmore luxuosa
      Descança scintillante formosura
      D'uma creança esbelta, uma pintura,
      Que parece dormir silenciosa.

      As alvas rômas, que a virtude espósa
      São como alegre ninho de candura;
      Tão fresca, tão sentida e melindrosa,
      Causa pena entregal-a á sepultura.

      Os estudantes em prodiga algarvia
      Retalhando o cadaver delicado
      Jogam chufas de sordida alegria.

      Mais tarde o esqueleto dissecado
      Assiste ás prelecções d'anatomia
      Á escuta com ar petrificado.




*Epitaphio*


      Meu coração aqui jaz, erma ruina
      Onde habita a ironia, o vil phantasma
      Golphão anachoreta entre o miasma
      Perseguido p'la brisa crystallina.

      O lyrio, o trevo ri junto á bonina,
      Só de raiva a minha alma abdica, pasma
      Porque a tristeza famulenta traz-m'a
      Nas duras garras d'ave de rapina.

      Meu coração aqui, sob esta alfombra
      Dos pallidos desdens, justos ciumes
      Adora morto e frio a tua sombra.

      Até que emfim--oh ceus!--os meus queixumes
      Te despertam o choro, que me assombra
      Envolvendo o cadaver em perfumes!




*Aquarella*


      Accorda a sombra tacita do lago,
      Do rouxinol a candida volata;
      A lua em chispas tremulas de prata
      Imprime ao lesto amor um tom presago.

      O vento raro e brando com afago
      O tredo esquife languido arrebata
      E o transporta subtil, como um pirata,
      Dando azas ao terror ignoto, vago.

      Suspira na floresta a morna aragem,
      As 'strellas trocam beijos delirantes,
      Que mais excitam castellã e pagem,

      Eis brilha uma coiraça junto á margem
      E a frecha sibilando alguns instantes
      Acaba n'um só golpe os dois amantes.




*Testamento*


      Lego uma trança do cabello d'ella
      Para atar um cavallo á mangedoura
      E as cartas da flacida impostora
      Para embrulhar assucar e canella.

      Ao credulo rival, deixo, leitora,
      A licença de entrar pela janella;
      Outrosim deixo as ligas e a fivela
      Que cingiram a perna encantadora:

      Os beijos que me deu ficam comigo
      E a memoria das noites palpitantes
      Hade caber tambem no meu jazigo.

      O seu retracto irá ao lupanar
      P'ra assistir á luxuria das bacchantes
      Já que a dona não vae em seu logar.




*Barcarola*


      «Corre, vôa, borboleta, vae graciosa
      Libar ondas de nectar delirante
      A anémona cingir, o lyrio, a rosa
      Com a aza fugitiva, coruscante.

      «Vae soffrega d'amor e sê ditosa.
      Dá-se no ceu um caso semelhante
      Quando estrellas em noite vaporosa
      Se abysmam n'uma queda extravagante.

      «Vae mariposa, a chamma te fascina
      Na aresta do ludibrio, como esphinge
      Em deserto d'areia crystallina.»

      Callam-se as vozes; picam-se as amarras;
      A gondola deslisa e o mar attinge
      Ao som dos bandolins e das guitarras.




*Bric-à-brac*


      O dono miseravel da locanda
      O _brocanteur_ terrivel, sanguinario
      Agonisa n'um catre solitario
      D'uma alcova minuscula, execranda.

      Affinca as mãos convulso n'um rosario,
      Ao ceu a vida, supplice, demanda,
      N'uma imagem de Christo veneranda
      Crava os olhos de abutre, de corsario.

      Pois apesar das lagrimas-remorsos
      Das victimas do seu medonho trama
      Ruins phantasmas de lividos escorços.

      Nos paroxismos vende, além da cama,
      O Christo a um judeu, e em vis esforços
      A alma entrega a Satan, que lh'a reclama.




*Paysagem*


      O sol adormecera no horisonte;
      As nuvens em retalhos somnolentos,
      Parecem nos bisarros tons cinzentos
      O grupo despenhado de Phaetonte.

      O riacho deslisa ao pé do monte
      Em frequentes e turgidos lamentos;
      A philomela ensina o canto aos ventos
      No chorão, que murmura junto á fonte.

      A varzea rescende á larangeira!
      Da cathedral nas frestas em ogiva
      Um rancho d'andorinhas s'enfileira;

      E nas trevas soluça a sombra esquiva
      Do coveiro, que planta uma roseira
      Onde jaz a venal filha adoptiva.




*Vae victis*

(_Struggle for life_)


      Rasga sacrilego a amplidão celeste
      Um milhafre com azas pardacentas
      E a cotovia harmoniosa investe
      Armando as garras torpes e cruentas.

      Negro como o lethargo do cypreste,
      Rosna o vento nas franças macillentas,
      O sol dardeja n'um pallor agreste
      Que enthusiasma as nuvens corpolentas.

      A luz crua p'lo espaço se derrama,
      Engrossam os trovões em alcateia,
      Rutila do corisco a alegre flamma.

      A presa que o milhafre saboreia
      É o emblema do fraco, o velho drama
      Que o systhema do mundo patenteia.




*Episodio balnear*


      N'uma _soirée_ heroica, ignea e linda
      Jurára o fulvo Arthur até á morte
      Ser da formosa e pudibunda Olinda
      Chumbando a ella p'ra sempre a sua sorte.

      Por ella ao inferno iria, o mar ainda
      Beberia d'um trago! Ella é seu norte,
      Meiga estrella de lucido transporte,
      Palpitante de rubra graça infinda.

      De manhã cêdo a nossa _Julieta_
      Desce nas crespas vagas a banhar-se
      Mascarada n'um fato de baeta

      E quando grita prestes a affogar-se,
      Chega _Romeu_, exhibe uma gorgeta,
      Mas não vae lá, que teme constipar-se.




*Reischoffen*

_6 de Agosto de 1870._


      Desfraldam-se estandartes e trombetas,
      Ouve-se o crepitar da espingarda;
      Quando o canhão rouqueja á retaguarda
      Scintilla a larga messe das baionetas.

      As coiraças protegem a vanguarda,
      Dos capacetes poisam nas facetas
      As crinas marciaes, vermelhas, pretas,
      Com expressão terrivel e galharda.

      Bonnemain determina a voz de carga:
      Os estribos telintam, fulge a espada,
      Debalde a morte os esquadrões embarga.

      N'esta lucta cyclopica, gigante,
      O exercito francez em retirada
      Teve assomos d'heroismo deslumbrante.




*Extra-muros*

NOTAS


No passeio publico

*Le roi fainéant*.--Allude-se a D. José. A contar de Clovis II até
Pepino o Baixo, os reis da dynastia merovingia são designados na historia
de França como reis _fainéants_, porque estiveram em permanente
tutela debaixo da auctoridade e poderio dos _Maires du Palais_.


No passeio publico

*Lá te vaes Portugal agora á véla.*--Ao amanhecer d'um dos primeiros
dias do mez do Abril de 1777, arrancaram do pedestal da estatua equestre o
retracto do Marquez de Pombal, e em seu logar collocaram as armas de
Lisboa--o navio com os dois corvos proverbiaes na lenda piedosa de S.
Vicente. É tradicção que o Marquez disséra então com acerado
sarcasmo--Agora é que Portugal vae á véla--

Vide Latino Coelho--Historia Politica e Militar de Portugal no seculo
XVIII, pag. 168.


O marquez de Pombal

*Enterrar os mortos e cuidar dos vivos.*--Alguns attribuem o dito ao
illustre general Pedro d'Almeida, marquez de Alorna--(Ferdinand
Denis--Histoire du Portugal, pag. 353.)


Garibaldi

*Nostalgia.*--Veja-se Oliveira Martins==_Brasil E colonias
portuguezas_, pag. 86 e 87, sobre os diamantes do Jequitinhonha,==e
Leon Gozlan, no seu romance _Histoire d'une diamant_, pag. 53, que
diz n'uma bonita phrase encarecendo a difficuldade da pesquisa dos
diamantes, que _os seus cofres estão sellados com spatho, jaspe e
ferro_; e acerca das minas de Visapur, (Bedjapour) vejam-se as paginas
134 e seguintes. O _carat_ era a unidade de peso usada antes do
systema decimal para pesar os diamantes, as perolas e as pedras preciosas,
e era avaliada em quatro grãos, cerca de 22 centigrammas.


O Terremoto

*Boletim militar.*--O Marquez de Pombal contractára generaes
estrangeiros para a honrosa defeza do paiz, fortificára a fronteira,
arcára com a curia romana, tecera uma bem urdida rede diplomatica,
reconstituira o reino, e tinha deixado os cofres do estado repletos. Sob o
governo da rainha mentecapta o dinheiro gastou-se e o civismo como que
desapparecera no alçapão d'uma magica. Foi então que Santo Antonio, que no
tempo de D. Pedro II sentára praça e subira a major (Oliveira
Martins--Historia do Portugal, tom. 2.º, pag. 179) ascendeu ao posto de
tenente coronel. Ha poucos annos correu na imprensa o celebre diploma, que
concedeu tão exotica patente ao thaumaturgo.




INDICE


Voz no deserto

No passeio publico

Forget me not

Vendetta

Desditosa cecem

O marquez de Pombal

Abandonado

Garibaldi

Imprecação

O terremoto

Entre palmeiras

Nostalgia

No confessionario

Boletim militar

Taborda

Antonio Pedro

Mysterioso abysmo

Na floresta

O cão de bordo

No harem

Esculptura

Cavatina

No theatro anatomico

Epitaphio

Aquarella

Testamento

Barcarola

Bric-à-brac

Paysagem

Vae victis

Episodio balnear

Reischoffen

Extramuros





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Garatujas, by Joaquim de Melo Freitas

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GARATUJAS ***

***** This file should be named 20582-8.txt or 20582-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/5/8/20582/

Produced by Pedro Saborano (Transcrito a partir das imagens
disponibilizadas pela Biblioteca Digital da Ria-BibRia)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
