The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cervantes e Portugal, by Carlos Barroso

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Cervantes e Portugal
       curiosidade litteraria

Author: Carlos Barroso

Release Date: August 23, 2007 [EBook #22378]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CERVANTES E PORTUGAL ***




Produced by Rita Farinha and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by National
Library of Portugal (Biblioteca Nacional de Portugal).)









CERVANTES E PORTUGAL

CURIOSIDADE LITTERARIA

POR

CARLOS BARROSO


DEDICADA AO RESPEITAVEL DR. E. W. THEBUSSËM BARÃO DE THIRMENTH


LISBOA
ANNO 325 DO NASCIMENTO DO AUTOR DE D. QUIXOTE




CERVANTES E PORTUGAL

     Los libros de caballería son la protesta contra el feudalismo, y
     Cervantes la gran estátua que corona el renacimiento.

     Emilio Castelar.


Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra appellidado por seus compatriotas, o _Manco
de Lepanto_, por ter sido mutilado n'aquelle celebre combate naval,
segundo consta de sua biographia veio a Lisboa com Phelippe II em 1581
onde se namorou de certa dama incognita e de quem teve uma filha, cujo
nome foi Isabel de Saavedra. Suppõe-se que seus amores na côrte lusitana
lhe inspiraram a linda novella pastoril da _Galatea_, onde o autor
figura disfarçado no pegureiro Lauso que suspira pela formosa pastora
Silena. O escriptor de tão bello idyllio assistiu á tomada das Ilhas
Terceiras pelo marquez de Santa Cruz.

       *       *       *       *       *

Começarei as minhas investigações pelo prologo do famoso poema critico
_D. Quijote_.

Alli dedica Cervantes um merecido elogio ao famoso rio Tejo que beija as
praias da inclita cidade de Ulysses, e cujas arêas consta da tradicção
serem de ouro.

Percorrendo esta obra digna de ser lida por todos os que se prezam de
verdadeiros litteratos, deparamos no capitulo 6.^o da sua 1.^a parte,
que entre os livros que adornavam a bibliotheca do engenhoso fidalgo, se
encontraram além de outros de autores portuguezes o _Palmeirim de
Inglaterra_, cuja composição se attribue a um _discreto_ rei de
Portugal, e tambem a _Diana_ de Jorge de Montemayor.

Quando o Heroe da Mancha exalta a imaginaria gerarquia da senhora de
seus pensamentos D. Dulcinea do Taboso, afirma que não é oriunda de
outras familias celeberrimas de Hespanha que menciona, nem mesmo dos
Alencastros, Pallas e Menezes de Portugal.

O pastor Lope Ruiz, com cuja historia entretem Sancho Pança o seu
temerario amo, ao fugir da ingrata Torralva, detem-se nas margens do
Guadiana antes de passar com seu rebanho para Portugal.

O reino da princeza Micomicona era maior que Portugal e Castella juntos.

Na 2.^a parte, suppõe o escudeiro de D. Quixote que mais de 12:000
exemplares da historia de seu valente patrão, se achavam n'aquelle tempo
impressos, e afirma como testemunhas do que refere a Portugal, Barcelona
e Valencia.

O rio Guadiana entra _pomposo_ e _grande_ em Portugal.

Na profunda e tenebrosa cova de Montesinos promette o _caballero de los
leones_ á sua phantastica amante, andar por causa d'ella as sete
partidas do mundo com mais pontualidade que o infante D. Pedro de
Portugal.

Para provar a verdade da existencia dos cavalheiros andantes, diz o da
Triste Figura ao conego de Toledo: «Si no diganme tambien que no es
verdad que fué caballero andante el valiente lusitano Juan de Merlo, que
fué á Borgoña, y se combatió en la ciudad de Ras con el famoso señor de
Charny, llamado Mosen Enrique de Remestan, saliendo de entrambas
empresas vencedor y lleno de honrosa fama.»

Era do _excelentisimo_ Camões uma das eclogas que haviam de representar
as pastoras em cujas redes se embaraçou o pensativo escravo de Dulcinea.

       *       *       *       *       *

Passando do primor de Cervantes á sua quasi rival Galatea, lê-se que o
pae da linda heroina das margens do aurifero Tejo, intenta prendel-a com
os laços de hymineo a um pastor lusitano das ribeiras do deleitoso Lima.
Que bellos são os versos da apaixonada amante de Erastro quando ao
despedir-se do seu dourado rio, canta:

    «¡Que tengo de despedirme
    De ver el Tajo dorado!
    ¡Que ha de quedar mi ganado,
    Y yo triste he de partirme!»

É pena que tão deslumbrante producção ficasse por acabar e que o leitor
ignore se os zagaes do manso Henares chegaram a rechassar o pastor
estranho.

       *       *       *       *       *

Passemos ás _Novellas Exemplares_.

Na da _Hespanhola ingleza_, Ricaredo depois de separar-se de Isabella,
seguindo a derrota das Ilhas Terceiras, em que sempre se encontravam
navios portuguezes das Indias Orientaes, approxima-se com effeito de um
carregado de especiarias e de tantas perolas e diamantes, que valiam
mais de um milhão de ouro, e levava trezentas pessoas, ao qual abastece
de artilheria por tel-a alijado durante uma tespestade.

Quando Isabella parte para Hespanha, promette o capitão do baixel á
rainha de Inglaterra de aportar a Lisboa, Cadix ou Sevilha.

No _Licenciado Vidraça_ observa-se a anecdota do portuguez que pintava
as barbas de negro, o qual altercando com um castelhano disse-lhe: «por
estas barbas que tenho no rosto», a quem redarguiu o licenceado: «não
digaes tenho, dizei _tiño_ (palavra hespanhola que em portuguez equivale
a _tinjo_).

Na _Força do sangue_, o arrebatador da honra de Leocadia afim que ella
para o futuro o desconhecesse inteiramente, ao deixal-a com os olhos
vendados junto á egreja da praça, muda a voz e annuncia-lhe em lingua
meio portugueza e meio castelhana, que póde d'alli ir para casa de seus
paes.

No _Zelloso extremenho_, diz Loaysa ao negro guarda da jovem esposa do
velho Carrizales, que sabia cantigas capazes de fazer pasmar até aos
portuguezes.

A negra Guiomar era portugueza.

No _Colloquio dos cães_, Berganza vitupera os que fallando mal o latim
introduzem sua ruim linguagem qual cobre dourado nas conversações
eruditas, como os portuguezes fazem com os pretos de Guiné.

Na _Tia fingida_, ha a seguinte phrase que acho muito graciosa: «á poco
rato vieron venir una reverenda matrona, con unas tocas blancas como la
nieve, mas largas que sobrepelliz de canónigo portugués.»

Ao descrever-se na mesma novella o caracter de todos os povos da
peninsula, tambem se menciona o dos portuguezes, ainda que de um modo
pouco lisongeiro.

       *       *       *       *       *

É em Lisboa que o barbaro hespanhol embarca para Inglaterra.

Em lingua portugueza canta o namorado Manuel de Sousa Coutinho seus
amores por que morre depois de os relatar, e cuja narração occupa todo o
capitulo X do livro I dos _Trabalhos de Persiles e Segismunda_.

Na interessantissima parte 3.^a dos mesmos presenceamos a chegada a
Portugal e desembarque dos viajantes na praia de Belem, d'onde se
dirigem á _famosa_ Lisboa, cujos ricos templos e hospitaes são
celebrados. A seguinte passagem merece ser lida em seu primitivo idioma:
«aqui el amor y la honestidad se dan las manos, y se pasean juntos; la
cortesía no deja que se le llegue la arrogancia, y la braveza no
consiente que se le acerque la cobardía: todos sus moradores son
agradables, son corteses, son liberales y son enamorados, porque son
discretos: la ciudad es la mayor de Europa y la de mayores tratos; en
ella se descargan las riquezas del Oriente y desde ella se reparten por
el universo; su puerto es capaz, no solo de naves que se puedan reducir
á número, sino de selvas movibles de árboles que los de las naves
forman: la hermosura de las mujeres admira y enamora, la bizarría de los
hombres pasma, como ellos dicen; finalmente, esta es la tierra que da al
cielo santo y copiosísimo tributo.»

Em S. Julião, que no original se vê escripto _Sangian_, é revistado o
navio em que vinham os peregrinos. A formosura de Auristela e a
galhardia de Periandro são o alvo da admiração do governador do castello
e de seus habitantes.

Não se esquecem os devotos peregrinos de visitar o historico mosteiro de
Santa Maria, e dirigindo-se depois por terra á capital, constantemente
acompanhados _de plebeya y cortesana gente_ encontram-se por acaso com
um dos vinte fugitivos da ilha selvagem, que tendo presenceado a morte
do desditoso Coutinho, volvera á patria, e dera conta do successo aos
parentes do fallescido, que o accreditaram _por tener casi en costumbre
el morir de amores los portugueses_, mandando depois d'esta noticia
fabricar um tumulo de marmore branco, e como se n'elle estivesse
enterrado, applicou-lhe seu irmão uma lapide na qual se lia a seguinte
inscripção em portuguez, que traduzida do castelhano reza assim:

      AQUI JAZ VIVA A MEMORIA
            DO JÁ MORTO
      MANUEL DE SOUSA COUTINHO,
        CAVALHEIRO PORTUGUEZ,
QUE SE NÃO FOSSE PORTUGUEZ AINDA VIVERA.
          NÃO MORREU ÁS MÃOS
        DE NENHUM CASTELHANO,
  MAS SIM ÁS DO AMOR, QUE TUDO PÓCE;
        PROCURA SABER SUA VIDA,
        E INVEJARÁS SUA MORTE,
            PASSAGEIRO.

O qual lido por Periandro confirmou que excede na composição de
epitaphios a gente da nação portugueza.

O cavalleiro que entrega o menino recemnascido a Ricla, diz-lhe que seus
inimigos o perseguem, e que se por alli passarem e lhe perguntarem por
elle, diga-lhes que apenas tinha visto tres ou quatro homens a cavallo
que iam gritando _á Portugal, á Portugal_.

Mais adiante conta o polaco as suas aventuras em Lisboa, onde
inopinadamente mata certo fidalgo, filho de uma senhora, em cuja casa se
refugia o assassino para subtrahir-se á justiça; a mãe do assassinado
sem saber do caso, esconde-o por detraz dos tapetes de sua mesma alcova,
tem a generosidade de não o entregar á justiça depois de saber do crime
que o seu protegido havia commettido, e para não faltar á hospitalidade
perdôa-lhe, e dá-lhe fuga pela porta occulta de seu jardim.

Ao fallar Cervantes de Valencia e de suas lindas mulheres, diz que é
gracioso o dialecto valenciano, e que só com o idioma portuguez _puede
competir en ser dulce y agradable_.

O sumptuoso palacio de Manases em que se hospedaram os peregrinos em
Roma achava-se situado junto ao arco de Portugal.

Emfim, o retrato da bellissima Auristela feito em Lisboa por um pintor
portuguez, foi por outro pintor comprado em França e d'alli transportado
á Hespanha.

       *       *       *       *       *

Na _Viagem do Parnaso_, canto IV, depois de descrever o autor a deidade
que personifica a Poesia, e de dizer que o Sul lhe brinda perolas, Sabea
perfumes, o Tiber ouro, e Hibla suavidade, continúa:

    «Galas Milan, y lusitania amores.»

Mais adiante e no mesmo canto lê-se:

    «Aquel discreto Juan de Basconcellos
    Venia delante en un caballo bayo,
    Dando á las musas lusitanas celos.

E pouco depois:

    «Así como las naves que cargadas
    Llegan de la oriental India á Lisboa,
    Que son por las mayores estimadas;
    Esta llegó desde la popa á proa
    Cubierta de poetas, mercancia
    De quien hay saca en Calicut y en Goa.

E elogiando a alguns poetas diz no canto VII:

    «De la alta cumbre del famoso Pindo
    Bajaron tres bizarros lusitanos,
    A quien mis álabanzas todas rindo
      Con prestos pies y con valientes manos
    Con Fernando Correa de La Cerda
    Pisó Rodriguez Lobo monte y llanos.
      Y porque Febo su razon no pierda,
    El grande Don Antonio de Ataide
    Llegó con furia alborotada y cuerda.

Entre os sonetos que compoz Cervantes, observa-se um dirigido ao marquez
de Santa Cruz que se apoderou das ilhas dos Açores.

       *       *       *       *       *

Em conclusão; nos seus onze entremezes só duas cousas se lêem referentes
a Portugal, e ambas no da _Guarda cuidadosa_, em que apparece um
vendedor ambulante que entre outras cousas apregoa _hilo portugués_, e
varias scenas depois um soldado que menciona a grande peça de Diu
existente em Lisboa, não sei se no Arsenal do Exercito. São estas as
suas palavras--«No habiéndome espantado ni atemorizado tiros maiores que
el de Dio, que está en Lisboa.»

O que me faz collegir que o dicto militar presenciou o memoravel cêrco.

       *       *       *       *       *

É isto tudo o que li relativo a Portugal nas obras do immortal critico
das Hespanhas, e que fielmente relato, rogando aos que lerem este
folheto me desculpem a má linguagem em que o escrevi em

Lisboa, aos 18 de fevereiro de 1872.




NOTA


Referindo-se a Bento Caldera (portuguez) primeiro traductor dos Lusiadas
em castelhano, diz o sr. visconde de Jurumenha na sua bella edição das
obras do immortal Luiz de Camões, 1860, as seguintes palavras: «O
celebre Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra fez menção da traducção e traductor
n'estes versos na sua _Galatea_ liv. VI, _Canto de Caliope_.

    Tu que de luso el singular tesoro
    Irigiste en nueva forma á la ribera
    Del fertil rio, á quien el lecho de oro
    Tan famoso le hace adonde quiera;
    Con el devido aplauso, y el decoro
    Devido á ti, Benito de Caldera,
    Y á tu ingenio sin par prometo honrarte,
    Y de lauro, y de hiedra coronarte.

FINIS CORONAT OPUS.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cervantes e Portugal, by Carlos Barroso

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CERVANTES E PORTUGAL ***

***** This file should be named 22378-8.txt or 22378-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/3/7/22378/

Produced by Rita Farinha and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by National
Library of Portugal (Biblioteca Nacional de Portugal).)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
