The Project Gutenberg EBook of O Ensino da Historia da Arte nos Lyceus e
as excursões escolares, by Joaquim de Vasconcellos

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: O Ensino da Historia da Arte nos Lyceus e as excursões escolares

Author: Joaquim de Vasconcellos

Release Date: March 16, 2008 [EBook #24844]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK O ENSINO DA HISTORIA DA ARTE ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)






O ENSINO

DA

HISTORIA DA ARTE NOS LYCEUS

E

AS EXCURSÕES ESCOLARES

POR

Joaquim de Vasconcellos




PORTO

Typ. de A. J. da Silva Teixeira, Successora

Rua da Cancella Velha, 70

1908




O Ensino da Historia da Arte nos Lyceus

E

AS EXCURSÕES ESCOLARES


Os Documentos que vão lêr-se prendem-se com um problema que julgo de
immediato interesse e da maior influencia educativa. A circular de 25 de
outubro de 1906 é a que recommenda a organisação das _excursões
escolares_, como elemento pedagogico de capital importancia.

Não é de agora o empenho com que me occupo do assumpto. Ha mais de
trinta annos (1877) que em artigos avulsos da imprensa, conferencias
publicas, opusculos e volumes de critica e de pedagogia da Arte, ando
propondo a solução racional e mais economica, dentro dos nossos usos e
costumes, isto é: conforme as boas tradições da arte e da vida
portugueza.

O assumpto vae ser debatido muito brevemente pelo Conselho do Lyceu
El-Rei D. Manoel II. Os documentos são ineditos.

É necessario advertir que o elemento estampa, que as figuras (e portanto
a _Arte_) inundaram==é este o termo==os livros, destinados á instrucção
primaria e secundaria, porque o programma official dos concursos de
compendios exige as illustrações, que são applicadas, muitas vezes, sem
sombra de criterio, sem o menor respeito pelas leis da esthetica. Já não
fallarei do criterio pedagogico, revelado na escolha d'ellas[1]... Esta
questão é apreciada em outro logar[2].

Porto, 1 de novembro de 1908.

                                                 _Joaquim de Vasconcellos._




DOCUMENTO I


                                  Ill^mo Ex^mo Snr. Reitor do Lyceu Central
                                            do Porto _El-Rei D. Manuel II_.

Já em sessão do Conselho do Lyceu[3], agradeci a honra de me haverem
convidado para collaborar no programma que convém organisar, no intuito
de satisfazer os varios fins do problema educativo que a Circular de 25
de outubro de 1906 da Direcção Geral de Instrucção Publica recommenda á
attenção do corpo docente dos Lyceus.--Hoje renovo o meu agradecimento e
repito que apenas sobre um dos pontos do programma da circular me posso
pronunciar com conhecimento de causa; o que se refere á visita dos
alumnos aos nossos _monumentos nacionaes_.

Não pertenço ao grupo dos professores que leccionam sciencias physicas e
naturaes, nem ao grupo que ensina geographia e historia. A esses
especialmente compete responder. Como adjunto me considero pois,
sómente, como vogal supplementar a quem os seus estudos especiaes sobre
a historia da arte e das industrias portuguezas, feitos ha dezenas de
annos, dão voto no problema educativo. É unicamente como escriptor e
pedagogo, que tenho sido n'esses assumptos de educação artistica, que
posso prestar algum serviço; como professor do Lyceu não poderia ter
competencia n'uma materia que em nenhum Lyceu do reino é ensinada.

Devo dizer, a proposito, que semelhante materia--_estudo dos Monumentos
Nacionaes_--portanto estudo da Arte, em geral, e das suas varias
manifestações decorativas--é hoje ensinada unicamente na Escola de
Bellas-Artes de Lisboa, em tres cadeiras, segundo a ultima organisação
(Reforma de 14 de novembro de 1901)[4]. A Escola irmã do Porto não tem
esse ensino, nem sombra d'elle. Estão no mesmo caso as duas Escolas ou
Academias polytechnicas de Lisboa e Porto, os dois Institutos
industriaes das mesmas cidades e ainda todas as Escolas Industriaes do
Reino, apesar de serem de fundação recente (1883-84).

Comtudo, em todos esses estabelecimentos de ensino (e inclusive na
propria Universidade de Coimbra, cadeira de Desenho annexa á faculdade
de Philosophia), o ensino das formas da arte entra, com mais ou menos
desenvolvimento, como disciplina obrigada. Esqueceu-se porém o
legislador, esqueceram-se os pedagogos officiaes de nos dizer como é que
o ensino das formas, quer pelo desenho (lapis ou pincel), quer pela
esculptura (escopro ou cinzel), quer pelo esquadro em linhas
architectonicas--se pode realisar, quando alumnos e professores ignoram
por completo a genese historica d'essas formas e a esthetica que d'ellas
se deriva, em ultima instancia!

Sublinho muito de proposito esta anomalia para que ninguem supponha que
é problema facil ensinar a alumnos de qualquer Lyceu, mesmo nas classes
superiores (6.ª e 7.ª) o methodo pelo qual se chega a uma apreciação,
embora muito summaria, mas sensata de qualquer monumento, quer sob o
aspecto esthetico, quer sobre o ponto de vista historico. Esses alumnos
têm comtudo, sempre noções sufficientes das outras disciplinas
(Sciencias physicas e naturaes--Geographia e Historia) que poderão
utilisar praticamente nas excursões escolares. Da arte, porém, e
mórmente da architectura, não possuem a minima noticia. E não se diga
que se trata de especialisar, de proceder a estudos technicos, dentro de
um programma que pertence só ás escolas especiaes. Mesmo reduzindo a
exposição ao mais elementar, dando á Arte apenas o papel de companheira
da Historia, ainda fica margem para serios estudos, ainda são graves as
difficuidades que encontro.

A inclusão do ensino da Historia da Arte no programma dos Lyceus
centraes seria evidentemente o meio mais efficaz de interessar o alumno
no estudo dos monumentos nacionaes e, por meio d'elles, no estudo de
todas as tradições patrias, no estudo do nosso solo, dos nossos
costumes, da historia intima da familia portugueza. Não é uma utopia.

O decreto de 14 de novembro de 1901 já diz no preambulo textualmente:
«Lá fóra, cadeiras de historia da arte estão appensas ao ensino
secundario, como explicação, ora causal, ora integrante dos successos da
historia social e politica.» (L. cit., pag. 70). Poderei, se fôr
preciso, apresentar a V. Ex.^a e ao Conselho do Lyceu numerosos volumes
nas linguas allemã e franceza que servem de compendios de Historia da
Arte nas varias classes do ensino lyceal da Allemanha e França, tanto
para o sexo masculino, como para o sexo feminino. Limito-me aqui a citar
apenas as obras magistraes do Prof. Wilhelm Lübke de Stuttgart, não as
grandes monographias sobre a historia da architectura, esculptura,
pintura, etc., mas sómente os resumos methodicos com o caracter de
vulgarisação e de propaganda em grande escala, para intelligencias
medianas, resumos que têm sido traduzidos em quasi todas as linguas
vivas europeias.

O estudo da historia da arte e o modo como ella é divulgada no ensino
secundario, influiu até no ensino da historia, propriamente dito,
transformando-o, ampliando-o. Vejamos:

Ha mais de 25 annos que o ensino da historia começou a ser facultado na
Allemanha aos dous sexos, de modo a ligar os factos politicos com as
tradições, as manifestações da arte, e com os costumes sociaes. O que
foi historia, segundo a idéa limitada do _chronista_, transformou-se na
pintura da civilisação de um paiz. Os allemães crearam o termo:
_Culturgeschichte_ para caracterisar esse novo processo de escrever e de
ensinar a historia. Assim vemos, por exemplo, já n'uma obra notavel de
E. Döring: _Lehrbuch der Geschichte der alten Welt für höhere Schulen_
(Manual da historia do Mundo antigo para escolas secundarias, Frankfurt
a/M. ed. M. Diesterweg, 1880) a historia politica dos povos orientaes,
dos gregos e dos romanos, ligada á mythologia, á historia da arte e ao
quadro da civilisação antiga. Illustram os volumes gravuras dos mais
famosos monumentos, reproducções das mais celebres estatuas e pinturas
muraes; são chamados a depôr os productos afamados da arte ceramica e da
glyptica, que tão fielmente nos descrevem as scenas da vida intima dos
antigos. Os trajes, os utensilios domesticos, a vida do palco e da
officina, nada falta n'esse compendio de historia. O estudo da
architectura vae, por exemplo, até á analyse das plantas dos edificios
(templos, theatros) e dos seus elementos constructivos (systema das tres
ordens). E comtudo esta obra nunca deixa de ser um compendio de
historia, com o caracter de texto para o ensino secundario (_für höhere
Schulen_).

Já em 1891 um auctor inglez (Morse Stephens) tentou n'uma _Historia de
Portugal_[5] um processo parecido, illustrando o texto com grande
abundancia de imagens, sem comtudo pretender imitar, nem de longe, o
methodo pedagogico, transcendente, do auctor allemão citado.

Os novos modelos estrangeiros não passaram desapercebidos em Portugal a
um ou outro amigo da instrucção. O benemerito escriptor Trindade Coelho
no seu volume intitulado _Pão Nosso_--Leituras elementares e
encyclopedicas para uso do povo (Lisboa, Aillaud, 1904) inclue um
capitulo _Arte_ (pag. 245-256), que abrange a _Architectura_,
_Esculptura_ e _Pintura_ e por fim _Monumentos de Portugal_, com 14
grav., entrando na ultima secção vistas do mosteiro dos Jeronymos e da
Batalha. O unico reparo que devemos fazer a esta tentativa corajosa e
benemerita, é a reducção extrema do assumpto a 15 pag., quando em tão
limitado espaço apenas caberia uma menção resumida dos edificios
notaveis portuguezes sómente e da sua significação historica.

É sob este ponto de vista, n'esta intima relação que deve ser
recommendado o estudo dos nossos principaes monumentos aos alumnos dos
Lyceus. O professor de historia deve entender-se sempre com o
especialista que houver de fazer a exposição propriamente technica e
esthetica. E quando digo _especialista_, sublinho o termo, porque
excluindo do terreno o erudito que pode cançar o alumno com uma tarefa
excessiva, ponho tambem de parte o curioso, que o enfastiará com
banalidades. Só quem conhece um assumpto a fundo é que póde gradual-o em
harmonia com o sentir e pensar de um auditorio, cuja capacidade no caso
sujeito--o dos Lyceus--deve variar muito.

Os Mosteiros de Belem e da Batalha, a collegiada de Nossa Senhora da
Oliveira, os templos de Alcobaça e Leça do Balio, as Sés de Lisboa,
Porto e Coimbra, as creações polymorphas de Thomar e Cintra e muitas
outras, estão tão intimamente ligadas á vida historica da nação
portugueza, que não é possivel ao moderno prelector separar o elemento
_arte_ da narrativa do chronista, tanto menos que os antigos escriptores
foram quasi sempre de um laconismo desesperador em materia d'arte, e
devem ser corrigidos e completados a cada passo, dentro da aula e fóra
d'ella, durante as excursões. Temos tido occasião de verificar centos de
vezes perante os monumentos, que estes e as suas pedras desmentem os
chronistas.

Deve exigir-se pois ao professor de historia dos nossos Lyceus o
conhecimento da historia da arte e da archeologia, tanto quanto fôr
necessario para a informação dos seus respectivos alumnos. Para elle se
habilitar com esse ensino, é forçoso crear cursos livres,
sufficientemente remunerados, junto dos Lyceus, para os quaes o Governo
deverá chamar os especialistas de merito comprovado.

Até então, terá o professor de historia de contentar-se com a sorte que
o poderá favorecer com o concurso de um collega ou de pessoa estranha ao
Lyceu, bastante habilitada e intelligente para comprehender o modesto
cargo de _commentador_ technico das excursões que revestirem um caracter
artistico; bastante enthusiasta e amante da sua terra para pôr em
relevo, n'uma demonstração de esthetica pratica, applicada, o que
constitue o sentimento do Bello na Arte e o seu reflexo sobre a alma
portugueza.

Esse commentario artistico não é, nem póde ser o que se faz no ensino
academico aos alumnos que se encaminham para o estudo das Bellas-Artes.
É uma _iniciação_ no estudo elementar das fórmas da arte, mórmente na
architectura e nas artes decorativas, que d'ella dependem, iniciação
para a qual se exige a collaboração assidua do alumno, que deverá levar
sempre debaixo do braço o seu album ou caderno de notas, para aprender a
tomar apontamentos e a fazer pequenos esbocetos _in loco_.

Em casa deverá ampliar e completar as notas tomadas segundo um
_Questionario_ adequado.

Resumo as minhas conclusões:

    1.º O estudo dos Monumentos Nacionaes é necessario no ensino
    secundario dos Lyceus centraes, pelo menos.

    2.º Este estudo não póde realisar-se proficuamente sem um estudo
    parallelo dos elementos essenciaes da historia da arte.

    3.º Este estudo póde e deve ser feito como Commentario ao Curso de
    Historia, pelos seguintes meios:

       a) Excursões escolares dos alumnos das classes mais adeantadas.

       b) Commentario technico e esthetico perante o monumento, á altura
       da capacidade dos alumnos.

       c) Notas, esboços e reproducções photographicas, tiradas nas
       respectivas localidades.

    4.º É necessario crear, desde já, os Cursos livres sobre historia da
    Arte, especialmente da _Arte nacional_, junto dos Lyceus centraes,
    emquanto não se incluir o ensino regular das fórmas da Arte no
    Quadro das disciplinas do Lyceu para ambos os sexos, conforme existe
    ha muito nos Lyceus de França e Allemanha.

    5.º É necessario ir juntando, desde já, o material de demonstração,
    colleccionando estampas, photographias e reproducções em gesso, que
    sirvam para o estudo, o que póde ser feito, aproveitando os
    trabalhos dos alumnos e quaesquer publicações nacionaes de valor,
    por exemplo, a excellente collecção da Casa Biel do Porto: _A Arte e
    a Natureza em Portugal_, que já apresenta um inventario artistico
    muito variado e muito valioso (73 fasc. a 4 est., total 292, com
    texto em portuguez e francez), publicação economica que está até ao
    alcance dos alumnos, porque os fasc. vendem-se separadamente a 500
    reis.


    P. S. A obra está agora concluida em 8 vol. a 12 fasc. cada um. Cada
    fasc. a 500 reis, com 4 est. e 8 pag. de texto (Nota accrescentada
    em Outubro de 1908).




DOCUMENTO II


                                                          Ill^mo Ex^mo Snr.

Alguns collegas meus do Lyceu, que V. Ex.^a dignamente dirige e ainda
outros do Lyceu da 1.ª zona, alguns dos quaes assistiram ás minhas
_Conferencias sobre Historia da Arte nacional_, realisadas no Museu da
Academia portuense de Bellas-Artes nos meses de junho e
julho--manifestaram-me o desejo de as ouvir novamente, seguidas.

Raros foram os que assistiram a todas as cinco; e aquelles que só
ouviram fragmentos transmittiram-me, com o desejo acima formulado, os
votos dos collegas que, por dever do officio, não lograram assistir a
nenhuma; estes ultimos, com mais razão ainda, pediam e pedem a
repetição.

Parece-me, Ex^mo Snr., que n'este caso devo ser grato a manifestações
tão honrosas e corresponder ao desejo com a offerta de serviço maior e
mais effectivo do que aquelle que tentei em julho proximo passado.

Em vez de um Curso de _historia da arte romanica archaica_, da historia
de _um_ periodo, embora de capital importancia--offereço-me para
organisar um Curso graduado e completo da _Historia da Arte comparada_,
especialmente da Arte Nacional, em lições semanaes, ás quintas-feiras, e
se fôr necessario e a Lei o permittir, poderei reforçar esse Curso com
uma prelecção ao domingo, em quanto durar o anno lectivo.

Os meus dignos collegas que em ambos os Lyceus regem proficientemente as
cadeiras de Historia geral e especial, foram os primeiros a applaudir a
ideia que, em embrião, exponho a V. Ex.^a, para que se digne submettel-a
á consideração, ao superior criterio do Conselho do Lyceu, que a poderá
corrigir e completar, pois sendo uma innovação poderia parecer excesso
de trabalho n'um programma de estudos, já carregado soffrivelmente.

Trata-se, porém, de uma materia que só pede ouvintes _voluntarios_ e não
obriga a nenhum exame nem despeza--pois todo o material illustrativo é
offerecido por mim, (sendo aliás consideravel, raro e dispendioso) sem
nenhum encargo para o Estado.

N'este caso parece-me que presto algum serviço no sentido de uma
_Proposta_ fundamentada sobre o modo de tornar proficuas, para o Estudo
da Arte, as excursões escolares, a qual durante o anno lectivo findo
apresentei por escripto a V. Ex.^a e mereceu o louvor do Conselho
escolar[6].

Solicito de V. Ex.^a e do Conselho a mesma benevolencia para a offerta,
que ora faço, do _Curso graduado_.

Se fôr acceite, apresentarei o programma, sem demora, que de certo modo
se ajusta e combina com o Programma official do Curso de Historia. Nào é
copia de nenhum programma estrangeiro[7]: é uma adaptação rigorosamente
nacional, _especialmente para estudo do que é nosso_, embora os
lineamentos geraes se baseiem no que traçou magistralmente Mr. de
Caumont no seu _Curso de archeologia e historia da arte_ (civil,
religiosa e militar) Caen, 1870, 5.ª ed., em 3 vol.--e Mr. Ch.
Blanc--para a Historia das Artes decorativas (_Grammaire des arts du
dessin_, 6.ª edição; e _Grammaire des arts décoratifs_).

Como compensação--se a V. Ex.^a e ao Conselho parecer justo--peço apenas
que me sejam contadas as _horas de serviço_ d'esse Curso como serviço
normal do horario, e pelo preço da tabella official, sem nenhuma
gratificação a mais.

Algumas horas de menos no ensino das linguas, que professo, podem ser
preenchidas por outro collega, sem prejuizo algum, creio eu.

Em compensação, offereço um ensino novo, nos Lyceus, que está
introduzido nos principaes paizes cultos, para ambos os sexos, no quadro
do ensino secundário desde 1875.

Se a troca de certas lições de linguas, pelas lições de materia nova,
não parecer acceitavel, por qualquer motivo ponderoso, então offereço-me
para accumular o serviço novo com o antigo, mediante a remuneração da
tabella official. E se a peço, é porque a organisação do Curso importa
para mim, em todo o caso, a acquisição constante de novo material de
estudo, além do que tenho accumulado durante cerca de quarenta annos.

O material para o ensino da Historia propriamente dita e da Historia da
Civilisação--no sentido em que os allemães a classificam de:
_Culturgeschichte_, que vi e examinei demoradamente no Lyceu, ha meses,
é--a bem dizer--inintelligivel, sem uma Exposição parallela da Historia
da arte antiga comparada, sobretudo da arte egypcia e greco-romana.

Em face das descobertas capitaes no dominio da arte pre-historica e
proto-historica, feitas em Portugal durante os ultimos trinta a quarenta
annos, é inadmissivel querer separar as questões ethnologicas,
ethnographicas e archeologicas, n'uma especialisação esteril, que a
ninguem aproveita, salvo ao pedantismo de alguns raros eruditos
bisonhos.

O ensino da historia deve ser vivo, hoje, palpitante, em face do
monumento, da estatua, da tela, da gravura, da photographia, da planta
topographica, do desenho e do esboço. O livro illustrado pela Arte
invadiu tudo.

Todo o enorme material dos Museus europeus foi posto em movimento ha
meio seculo.

O que sabe o alumno dos Lyceus de tudo isso?

O que sabe elle do material accumulado nas collecções nacionaes?--quando
uma imagem, um retrato supre, ás vezes, uma lição?

Fui talvez prolixo n'esta justificação; mas, confessando o defeito, peço
a benevola attenção de V. Ex.^a e do Conselho para os motivos, que são
puros e sinceros.

                                                     Deus guarde a V. Ex.^a

Porto, 9 de agosto de 1908.



Ill^mo e Ex^mo Snr. Reitor do Lyceu Central
do Porto--2.ª zona.

                                                      O PROFESSOR EFFECTIVO

                                                 _Joaquim de Vasconcellos._


    [1] Por exemplo: o compendio de _Historia_ do snr. Marques Mano
    (Porto, 1908--Preço 2$000 reis) tem 96 estampas. O compendio de
    _Geographia_ do mesmo auctor, (Porto, 1908--Preço 1$200 reis) tem 66
    estampas; aqui, uma boa escolha e cuidadosa reprodução; acolá,
    confusão e falta de criterio esthetico e pedagogico.

    [2] Na Revista: _Educação Nacional._ 8 de nov. 908.==A arte nos
    livros do Ensino.

    [3] No mez de maio de 1907.

    [4] Vid. _Boletim da Dir. Geral de Inst. Publ._--Anno I, 1902, fasc.
    1-5, pag. 70-88.

    [5] Foi traduzida por Oliveira Martins; as gravuras do original
    inglez apparecem, porém, mal reproduzidas.

    [6] Está transcripta no Documento I.

    [7] A prova já a dei no _Elencho de Quatro Conferencias_ (aliás
    cinco) que fiz nos mezes de junho e julho d'este anno, na Academia
    Portuense de Bellas-Artes. O programma impresso--Porto, 1908, 8
    paginas, versa sobre o _Estylo romanico archaico_ e o _Romanico dos
    seculos XI e XII_. Este programma nada tem de commum com o
    espetaculoso prospecto da 13.ª cadeira da Escola de Bellas-Artes de
    Lisboa--que trata da Historia geral da arte na Edade Media e envolve
    Portugal, por incidente, em appendice.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of O Ensino da Historia da Arte nos
Lyceus e as excursões escolares, by Joaquim de Vasconcellos

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK O ENSINO DA HISTORIA DA ARTE ***

***** This file should be named 24844-8.txt or 24844-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/8/4/24844/

Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
