The Project Gutenberg EBook of As ratices da Rattazzi, by Monteiro Ramalho

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: As ratices da Rattazzi
       O pello nacional

Author: Monteiro Ramalho

Release Date: March 16, 2008 [EBook #24843]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AS RATICES DA RATTAZZI ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)






AS RATICES DA RATTAZZI



Monteiro Ramalho

AS RATICES

DA

RATTAZZI


O PELLO NACIONAL

PORTO

TYP. DO JORNAL DA MANHÃ

215--RUA DE S. LAZARO--215

1880




AS RATICES DA RATTAZZI

O PELLO NACIONAL


I

Não pensem que eu vou descarregar algumas baterias de rhetorica, contra
uma audaciosa Maria que revestida de petulancia fidalga e
principesca--que é mais--divertiu-se em descalçar a luva elegante, para
nos atirar á guisa d'indomavel sympathia, uma bombasinha d'espalhafato,
a qual por felicidade sua ainda lhe arrebentou na mão gentil.

Não senhores, não vou, não foi para isso que ousadamente me saí do
casulo da minha nullidade.

Eu venho muito simplesmente manifestar a minha profundissima admiração,
em face do borburinho espantoso que para ahi se está fazendo, por causa
d'um livrinho tão precioso como o _Portugal à vol d'oiseau_.

Realmente é-me extremamente doloroso presenceiar os máos tratos que
todos os dias e por todos os modos, se estão applicando á pobre
princeza, sua auctora. Não posso ver isso, revolto-me, indigno-me,
porque os acho não só injustos, como violentos, covardes.

A despretenciosa mulhersinha andou um rôr de tempo a barafustar
atrapalhadamente, no bem honroso empenho de nos tornar conhecidos _lá
fora_, pois tinha tido innumeras occasiões d'avaliar o quanto essa gente
da Europa dá mostras de nunca ter enxergado nas cartas geographicas o
nosso delicioso torrão. Ella, a quem um amor genuinamente material
impellia para nós, que morria mesmo de desejos por nos cobrir
carinhosamente com as paginas amorosas d'um livro modesto:--ao vêr-nos
assim fórtes e robustos quaes somos, cheios de vigor, perfeitos e
bellos, sobretudo os do sexo forte--o que decerto mais lhe
interessava--, ella enthusiasmou-se grandemente, e dominada então de
certo despeito tambem, por se vêr litteralmente desmentida no seu
querido sonho intimo, foi talvez por isso levada a tratar-nos um pouco
mais rudemente.

Ora, a admittir-se esta hypothese, temos de confessar que é esta uma
razão perfeitamente innocente, e extraordinariamente natural.


II

É, comtudo, incontestavel que uma enorme sympathia concebeu por nós, e
tanto que não se poupou a prodigalisar aos seus mais affeiçoados, mais
escolhidos, mais protegidos, e mais amados, exhuberantes provas dos seus
principescos sentimentos.

Ninguem, aposto!, ainda se esqueceu d'esses mais que famosos banquetes,
a que concorreram quasi todas as notabilidades nacionaes, quasi todos os
genios que tanto abundam n'este paiz abençoado. E que festas não foram
aquellas, ruidosas, sumptuosas, magestosas, celebradas ao som festival
de atroadora algazarra d'etiqueta principesca; festas em que as
saudações ardentes se trocaram com as mais enthusiasticas convicções que
o Champagne benefico podia inspirar; em que os pacatos nomes portuguezes
foram profanamente assassinados, para cederem o logar muito
_resignadamente_, a outros d'origens incomparavelmente mais honorificas,
e significativas; finalmente, em que o delirio por vezes tomou atroadora
parte em manifestações febris!

Oh! não! não é possivel acreditar-se que tão amavel princeza, assim
prodiga, bemfaseja, protectora, obsequeiadora, galanteiadora, tudo
fizesse com intenções perfidas, com o estulto capricho de abusar de
todos os seus reconhecidos convivas, até ao ponto nefando de os
disfructar ignobilmente!...

A senhora Maria, convençam-se d'isso, não anda, de modo algum, de má fé
comnosco. Asseguro-o.

Ella trata-nos mal, convenho. Mas, porque demonio ha de a gente ir logo
pensar que seja puramente ella, uma pessoa tão boa, tão galante?...

Bem sabem que em toda a parte ha máos... secretarios, enganadores
oraculos, perversos conselheiros, que podiam muito bem aproveitar o
ensejo de satisfazer odios pequeninos, ao prestar á inoffensiva senhora
as ajudas que ella confiadamente requisitasse dos seus estomagos
recompensados.

Antes de a criminarmos, é dever geral procurar perceber na sua proza
traquinas, o trilho lodoso d'algum machiavelico denunciador.


III

Não serei eu que, não obstante, a queira já absolver peremptoriamente.

É certo que a questão está perfeitamente ás escuras, e portanto o mais
racional é indubitavelmente inculpar a princeza signataria, deixando em
paz qualquer assoprador, que aliás tem a attenuante de ser convidado a
entrar na insidiosa collaboração.

Por isso tambem eu agora quero atal-a só a ella, desapiedadamente, ao
poste da critica.

Foi debaixo d'esta pesada impressão, que quando o indignado clamor
publico me atirou ás mãos o famigerado livro, eu senti-me dominar
prodigiosamente por uma explosiva raiva contra a trossista audaciosa, a
quem votei logo uma aversão replecta de patriotismo. Pois que! Era assim
que a generosa _escriptora_ se dignava atirar-nos para o foco
deslumbrante da civilisação moderna, para Paris!?... Era de mais; tive
ganas de ir ter com ella, para desaffrontar cavalheirescamente a
ultrajada dignidade nacional.

Mas passados os momentos d'arrebatamento intempestivo, aquella
retractação formal e cathegorica que já estava phantasiando exigir-lhe,
foi conscienciosamente substituida pela mais franca e sonora gargalhada,
que jamais eu dei!

Pois é lá razoavel que alguem dê importancia aos devaneios phantasiosos
da sr.ª Maria! Naturalmente aborrecida da sua vida aventureira, empregou
as pequeninas horas vagas a espandir sobre o papel,--indefeso por seu
mal, que bem envergonhado se havia de achar--as tiradas portentosas da
sua imaginação fertil, aproveitando de passagem alguns improvisos
humoristicos, com que habilmente quiz apimentar a sua já muito frisante
critica--isto concedendo que seja ella a verdadeira auctora. Foi
amontoando com abundancia tudo quanto lhe pareceu mais interessante,
mais pittoresco até; soccorreu-se de vez em quando a quaesquer
«documentos auctorisados», e afinal offereceu-nos innocentemente esse
mimo admiravel, que tanto tem irritado os animos indigenas.


IV

Em vista d'isto, é uma dôr d'alma dar sete tostões pelo engraçado livro,
que não se perdia nada em ser despoticamente condemnado a qualquer
emprego hygienicamente mais utilitario.

Eu já disse que a bomba temeraria que ella pretendeu arremessar-nos,
estalou-lhe extemporaneamente nas mãos, por felicidade sua. Assim é, com
effeito.

Porque se ella se não ferisse, toda queimada pela sua pólvora
_adocicada_, não attrairía de tal fórma as disveladas attenções
publicas, que se apressáram humanitariamente em ir a soccorrel-a,
cuidando-a com liberalidade extremosa--comprando-lhe descuidosamente a
perola do seu livro.

Um tal _acaso_ quiz que os nossos bonissimos corações fôssem
poderosamente captivados, pela infeliz victima d'uma leviandade
desculpavel. E de facto, estou em dizer desassombradamente que não ha de
ter a minima razão de queixa, da nossa sollicita caridade, e do nosso
arrebatado amor do proximo.

Tamanha parece ter sido a dôr pelo malaventurado acontecimento, que para
christãmente se prodigalisar consolador allivio á princeza inexperta,
tantos exemplares da sua obra foram avidamente comprados, que por pouco
ella não ficou esgotada!

Vejam quanto é sempre conveniente, appellar para os sentimentos
misericordiosos d'um povo de tradicções fagueiras, como a nossa!...

A popularisada Maria tambem n'outra qualquer parte podia assim ser
alcançada por lamentavel desastre, e comtudo arriscava-se a que ninguem
fizesse caso das suas commoventes lamurias, deixando-a placidamente
debater-se, ainda porventura para castigo da sua creancice pouco
conforme com a idade compromettedora, nas agonias crueis de queimaduras
terriveis. E então grande seria o seu desgosto ao vêr-se
desattendida--tendo de guardar os seus industriosos livros.

Mas nós fizemos enorme barulho caritativo, despojando-nos virtuosamente
em seu beneficio...


V

Ora isto póde ser tudo quanto quizerem, menos razoavel, coherente.

Pois se já se sabia que magoando-lhe ferozmente as mãos atrevidas, a
nossa caridade proverbial corria logo em seu auxilio com piedoso fervor,
para que demonio é que a maltratáram assim, á respeitavel Leetizia?
Vontade unica de lhe serem amavelmente uteis.

Demais, eu acredito, seja embora ingenuidade, que sua alteza
recem-casada não conseguiu mais com o seu livro, do que mostrar
pretenciosamente os dotes fecundos d'um humorismo banal, com que quiz
amortalhar por sarcasmo pungente, os nossos, habitos e os nossos
homens--e as nossas mulheres tambem. Mas isto foi impensadamente feito,
d'um feitio enojante, com umas idéas espirituosas que nos enchem de
compaixão pela sua obcecada productora!

Os disparates disformes succedem-se n'uma correria talmente vertiginosa,
que a gente chega a perdel'os de vista, sem mesmo lhes poder prestar as
devidas homenagens.

A sr.ª Solms achou-nos por cá escondidinhos no nosso impagavel cantinho;
achou-nos talvez originaes ou primitivos; admittiu á custa dos
succulentos jantares, muitos thuribuladores gratuitos, que a informáram,
decerto com minuciosa nudez, dos nossos costumes, encapados brutalmente
em exaggeros de ridiculo, e vae ella toma surrateiramente os seus
apontamentos, reune cuidadosamente as graçolas grosseiras e chatas dos
seus galanteadores, faz incondicional acquisição de tudo o que lhe
contáram de mesquinho, rebaixador, e infamante--o que está perfeitamente
no genio nacional--e presenteia finalmente a publicidade com o producto
curioso de todas as monstruosidades que lhe ensinaram.

Hoje poucos deixarão já de ser concordes n'isto, e por consequencia, bem
que fóra de tempo, lamenta-se á uma a prodigiosa popularidade que se
dispensou ao interessante livréco.


VI

Porém antes de chegar a este louvavel e conveniente apuro, já a sensivel
honra nacional havia calorosamente protestado contra as diffamantes
leviandades de Madame, com gestos de indignação soberana, enchendo o
espaço amedrontado de brados energicos e furiosos, de reclamações
ribombantes, uma violenta tempestade prodiga de trovões atroadores, e
gravida de raios vingativos.

Ainda mesmo sob o transparente disfarce das replicas cheias d'espirito,
d'aquelle espirito portuguez pesado e forte sem subtilidades, os jornaes
em que ellas se escreveram por dias successivos, bem faziam comprehender
que mais eram desaffrontas accintosas, hervadas de resentimentos futeis,
do que pura e simplesmente um recambio bem entendido de tósas frisantes,
com a vantagem excellentissima de serem escudadas pela justiça do
despique franco, mas jovial, ou melhor ainda--trossista, singelamente.

Assim, que diabo! satisfizemos talvez a nossa vaidade beliscada, mas não
fômos precisamente, verdadeiramente, gente d'espirito.!

E querendo absolutamente estatelar a sr.ª Maria Rattazzi nas lamas
salpicantes da gargalhada sarcasta, apenas lhe obtivemos á nossa custa,
um mais lisongeiro resultado para o successo imprevisto da sua obra, que
da mesma fórma se viu immediatamente rodeada d'importancia, com que a
sua afortunada auctora naturalmente nunca havia sonhado!...

É o caso de dar corda para se enforcar.

Quem sabe a estas horas o que ella estará pensando de todo este
espalhafato jornalistico, que se tem agitado tempestuosamente em
_crescendos_ de protestos vigorosos contra as suas diatribes perfidas...

Não posso saber; mas talvez não fôsse totalmente despropositado o
presumir que se esteja rindo com a melhor vontade do mundo, de tantos
adjectivos instigadores, empregados com desperdicio.


VII

E, já que infelizmente não podemos fazer outra coisa, supponhamos que o
famigerado livro da celeberrima princeza se apresentava ahi um dia com o
seu risinho d'escandalo picante, a desafiar com descaramento canalha os
altaneiros brios patrioticos, inchados eternamente de
glorias--passadas...

Ninguem fazia caso. Os jornaes annunciariam no estylo proverbial
estafado, a sua obsequiosa recepção, limitando-se a imprimir-lhe
ligeiramente um qualquer dichote, simples de desprezo.

Consequencia inevitavel? Um silencio funebre:--a morte fulminante do
livro audaz; um bem entendido espancamento moral applicado
fleugmaticamente sobre a auctora pedante do dito, e sobretudo o mais
formal e esmagador desaggravo da dignidade lusitana.

Haveria com certeza muita gente que o lêsse em família:--sorria-se
desdenhosamente d'um tal montão d'inexactidões absurdas, mas com um
desdem frio, e ao cabo de algumas horas de leitura, talvez se enojasse
ao ponto de o pôr de lado; lamentando apenas aquelles tantos reis que
n'elle empregára irreflectidamente, por curiosidade.

Mas assim, com um tal barulho!... Era uma avidez pasmosa, da parte de
todos, em ler desde a primeira á ultima pagina, a maravilhosa obra da
principesca Maria--na asneira.

Fallava-se d'ella em toda a parte, no theatro, na rua, no club, no
gremio, em familia, de visita; em toda a sorte de conversações. A sua
deleitosa leitura suscitou frequentemente largas, acaloradas discussões:
uns apoiavam destemidamente as opiniões _desmascaradas_ da princeza,
talvez os informadores; outros protestavam energicamente, fazendo
rhetorica furibunda, com gestos traductores da incalculavel indignação,
que o seu limpido amor patrio lhes suggeria.

Em summa, por fim, ainda hoje, é do bom tom fallar _do livro da
Rattazi!..._


VIII

Continuemos a imaginar os resultados inestimaveis d'aquelle silencio
funestamente desattendido, por uma leviandade inqualificavel...

A sr.ª Maria Laetizia, Solms, Rattazzi e Rutte, e não sei que mais,
quando os innumeros exemplares do seu livro vieram para o explorado
Portugal, havia de forçosamente seguil-o passo a passo, com o seu terno
affecto maternal, a ver com inexcedivel cuidado o que lhe poderia
acontecer. Supponho bem ser este um ponto que não póde admittir duvida,
porque todos nós nos interessamos vivamente pelo que mais ou menos nos
diz respeito, tanto mais quando o objecto é, como o supracitado livro,
filho querido das nossas entranhas. (Não esquecer com isto que nunca
femeas pódem conceber, sem o respectivo auxilio productor dos _machos_).

De maneira que sua alteza--sua excellencia actualmente, e ainda aqui se
revela a sua nenhuma vaidade...--havia de portanto procurar logo nos
jornaes portuguezes, conhecer as impressões que elle inspirava.

Com o succedido, é mais que natural, como já tive occasião de presagiar
aqui mesmo, que _sua excellencia_ se risse expansivamente da nossa
ingenuidade quasi infantil, saboreando com as maiores doçuras os
recentes favos de mel da respectiva lua, que por pouco a não allumia
mais vezes do que a sua collega planeta o faz á terra.

Mas se ella se desse todos os dias á improba massada de consultar os
ditos jornaes, e os achasse sempre muito caladinhos, mudos e serios, sem
caírem na tolice inaudita de lhe popularisar o nome--oh! então é que
deveria ser bom vel-a, mesmo que fôsse _à vol d'oiseau_!...

Se bem que já não seja das mais notaveis _frescuras_, murchava
completamente, e repelliria furiosamente horrorisada, os supracitados
favos.

O editor parisiense, esse--desgraçado!--bradaria percorrendo agitado o
seu estabelecimento pacifico, á imitação de Henrique IV.

--_Ventre--gris!_

E maldiria nos seus justos furores do negocio mal afortunado, as
rabinices litterarias das princezas idiotas.


IX

Sim! hei de sempre maldizer todos os que desprezáram aquelle impagavel
silencio desprezado.

Porém o mal está feito, irremediavelmente feito; nós prestamo-nos
gostosamente duas vezes ás gargalhadas feminis d'uma frivola
colleccionadora d'apontamentos _producentes_, e agora caminhamos ahi por
essas ruas já impavidos, cheios de satisfação de nós mesmos, soberbos...

O que resta agora, para se sustentar uma tola questão eterna, é que sua
_excellencia_, já despida burguezmente das gallas de princeza, escreva
tambem um folheto em resposta aos nossos, e aos artigos verrinosos que a
nossa imprensa teve a generosidade de lhe conceder. Gostava de ver isso,
só para ter occasião de apreciar até onde podem chegar os furores dos
brios patrios... O que posso asseverar francamente é que o feliz editor
publicava-lh'o logo, com reconhecimento enorme, certo da boa _pechincha_
que lhe caía em casa, e mandando immediatamente para Lisboa metade da
edição--ou mais.

Ora, naturalmente quem se tiver entregue ao ingrato trabalho de me ter
lido, dirá--no caso de concordar commigo--, assim com uns ares de
censura.

--Mas porque demonio não vieram, vossê ou quaesquer outros mais
auctorisados, prevenir o máo passo errado que se estava dando.

Foram uns cynicos, uns perversos, que vendo como os animos em geral
ferviam ardentemente, não se apressárão em atirar-lhes um pouco d'agua
fria...

Eu por mim folgo sem duvida de não ouvir essas _recriminações_, porque
se o acaso quizesse que sim, teria que por minha vez imitar o bello typo
do Mephistopheles, perguntando-lhes com uma das suas boas gargalhadas,
sabem?--n'um sarcasmo d'effeito:

--Então os senhores decididamente não teem senso commum?...


X

Por conclusão, devo já agora prevenil-os de uma coisa, porque talvez
ainda não tivessem dado.

Se continuarem muito exaltados contra _sua excellencia_, não sabem quem
estimará muito isso, por lhe ser d'uma grandissima conveniencia?

É--que ella me perdoe!--a ex.^ma sr.ª D. Guiomar Torrezão, que terá
excellente ensejo de fazer tambem esgotar os exemplares da sua preciosa
traducção.

Bem sei que as letras patrias iam soffrer muito com essa perda, mas eu
apezar de tudo que ahi fica dito, ou antes d'accordo com isso, preferia
que ella nunca visse a luz da publicidade.

E não creia s. ex.ª que eu lhe queira mal, lá isso não. É... por causa
dos brios patrios, com quem se deve ter ainda mais consideração do que
com as letras supracitadas, suas irmãs de nome.

Porque o que nos valeu foi elles não saberem francez quasi geralmente.
Se soubessem arriscava-se a ousada princeza a já não existir a estas
horas, não chegando talvez a poder contrair as suas _recentes_ nupcias.

Ora dar-lhe agora a obra em portuguez é um perigo muito grande, porque
caso algum exforçado lusitano queira desaffrontar a sua patria
offendida, encontra na sua frente... um marido!

Nada, seja patriota, minha senhora, não queira desgraçar-nos.

      *      *      *      *      *

Em todo o caso eu appello para o lapis previlegiado de R. Bordallo
Pinheiro para que no caso de reincidencias, applique uma boa escovadella
ao pello nacional.

Desculpe-me elle o conselho, que só tem por fim leval-o a fazer uma boa
acção.

FIM


PREÇO 100 RS.





End of Project Gutenberg's As ratices da Rattazzi, by Monteiro Ramalho

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AS RATICES DA RATTAZZI ***

***** This file should be named 24843-8.txt or 24843-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/8/4/24843/

Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
