The Project Gutenberg EBook of O Máo Rei e o Bom Subdito, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: O Máo Rei e o Bom Subdito

Author: Unknown

Release Date: September 3, 2009 [EBook #29898]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK O MÁO REI E O BOM SUBDITO ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)





                                 O MÁO REI,
                                     E
                               O BOM SUBDITO.




                                 O MÁO REI,
                                     E
                               O BOM SUBDITO.

                                 UM  TRECHO
                           DA HISTORIA PORTUGUEZA.


                                   LISBOA,
                           NA IMPRENSA NEVESIANA.
                          Rua do Loureiro, n.º 15.
                                    1851.




O MÁO REI,
E
O BOM SUBDITO.


ElRei D. Sancho 2.º, denominado o _Capello_, ou por causa da sua maneira
de vestir (mais monastica que militar), ou em razão de seu natural
timido e fraco, parecia antes mais proprio para viver retirado em um
mosteiro, que para governar um Estado. Quando seu pai morreu, tinha elle
26 annos, e como era descuidado dos negocios do reino, e completamente
inhabil para o cargo que herdára, cada um vivia em Portugal muito á sua
vontade, tanto por causa da brandura do monarcha, e da sua simplicidade,
como em razão da maldade de seus conselheiros, e validos; porque estes,
vendo-o tão bem disposto para lhes deixar executar os máos desejos, se
servião de suas faltas para satisfazer sua avidez.

Ora, havia n'este tempo em Castella uma viuva muito moça, bella, e de
grande ascendencia; era D. Mecia de Haro, filha de D. Lopo Dias de
Haro, senhor de Biscaya, e de D. Urraca Affonso, filha natural d'Affonso
9.º Rei de Leão. Esta dama tinha sido casada com D. Alvaro Perez de
Castro, filho de D. Pedro Fernandez de Castro, o Castelhano, e de D.
Ximena Gomez, sua mulher, com quem havia tido longos amores. E era este
o mesmo que se mostrava tão louco com a sua paixão, e tão contente de si
proprio, que um dia tendo o Rei de Castella vindo pôr o cerco diante de
uma de suas cidades, tinha mandado armar as muralhas de panno de sêda,
dizendo que não queria outra defeza entre elle e os que o vinhão atacar.
Emfim, tendo-se casado com D. Mecia, e tendo vivido alguns tempos com
ella, havia morrido sem deixar filhos.

Foi então que achando-se D. Mecia no mais subido auge de seus encantos,
os validos d'Elrei D. Sancho, que conhecião suas inclinações,
exaggerárão de tal modo a belleza d'esta dama, que o persuadírão a
toma-la por mulher. Sendo elles, pois, os authores da sua união, D.
Mecia reconheceo sempre a obrigação em que lhes estava; e foi para com
elles tão excessiva a sua gratidão, que por causa d'ella esteve o reino
a ponto de se destruir. D. Mecia, com seus validos e os conselheiros
d'ElRei D. Sancho, dispunha de tudo a seu bel-prazer, dando os empregos
e os beneficios, fazendo o bem e o mal conforme lhe agradava.

Então os nobres e os prelados fizerão advertencias a Elrei D. Sancho,
representando-lhe que D. Mecia era sua parenta por sua tia Berenguela: e
que, se, conforme a lei de Deus, elle a não podia desposar, segundo a
lei da honra, ainda menos o devia fazer, sendo D. Mecia estéril. N'uma
palavra, dizião que devia largar esta mulher; mas o Rei lhe estava
tão affeiçoado, que, ou fosse por arte de magía, ou por causa da sua
belleza, não podia separar-se d'ella. Hindo as cousas assim, e
continuando ella a favorecer os conselheiros do Rei, mil extorsões, e
mil rapinas se commettião, sem que nenhum cuidado dessem a ElRei, e sem
que elle escutasse as queixas de seus subditos.

Os prelados do reino se queixárão, emfim, ao Papa Gregorio 9.º. D.
Sancho fingio arrepender-se, mas depois voltou a seus primeiros excessos
de fraqueza, que permittião toda a qualidade de dilapidações e
violencias. A excommunhão foi lançada, mas só no pontificado do Papa
Innocencio 4.º. D. Sancho, perdido em seus amores, resistio ainda.
Comtudo, eis que um dia, estando em Coimbra com a Rainha, um certo
Raymundo Viegas de Porto Carreiro, acompanhado de outras pessoas das
fronteiras da Galliza, chegárão a esta cidade. Estes guerreiros se
apoderárão de D. Mecia, que transportárão ao castello de Ourem. Então
ElRei, seguido de muita gente, partio armado a requerer que se lhe
entregasse sua mulher. Nada conseguio; elles a conduzírão á Galliza, e
d'ali passou a Castella, d'onde não voltou mais a Portugal.

Mas como ElRei se não emendou de nenhum modo, nem os malfeitores
recebêrão castigo algum, os prelados tornárão a queixar-se ao Papa
Innocencio 4.º. D. Sancho foi advertido ainda outra vez, mas o seu fraco
triunfou; decidio-se que um regente sería escolhido para governar o
reino. Ora, os prelados escolhêrão, diante do Papa, que lhes pedira
fizessem eleição d'um Monarcha, o Infante D. Affonso, Conde de Bolonha,
irmão do Rei, a quem de direito tocava o poder.

ElRei estava em Coimbra, quando vio as cartas do Papa, e as do Conde
de Bolonha, seu irmão, que queria entrar no reino. As penas de
excommunhão de que elle usava, a força que impunha aos rebeldes, o
fazião obedecer. D. Sancho ficou perturbado, e muito mais o ficou ainda,
quando seus máos conselheiros lhe disserão que não devia esperar que
fizessem a menor resistencia ao Conde, e que lhe era mister partir para
Castella a pedir soccorro a ElRei D. Fernando.

Pondo em execução este projecto, ElRei foi a Toledo contar a causa da
sua hida ao Soberano de Castella, e dizer como o Conde de Bolonha
pertendia usurpar-lhe o reino.

Com effeito ElRei D. Fernando se offereceo de motu proprio a mandar-lhe
soccorro, e no mesmo instante ordenou que o Infante D. Alonso de Molina
se dirigisse para Portugal, e que D. Diogo Lopez de Haro, senhor de
Biscaya, o acompanhasse. Era este o proprio irmão de D. Mecia Lopez,
mulher d'ElRei D. Sancho. Muitos outros fidalgos partírão com elles, mas
já uma parte do reino pertencia ao Conde.

Todavia, quando o Conde de Bolonha soube da vinda d'ElRei D. Sancho,
reunio certos prelados, que escrevêrão aos frades de S. Francisco da
Covilhã, executores das penas fulminadas nas cartas do Santo Padre, afim
de cumprirem o seu officio. Estes fôrão immediatamente ter com ElRei e
com o Infante de Molina, e lhes advertírão, que, debaixo de pena de
excommunhão, houvessem de respeitar as ordens do Papa. D'esta sorte
elles não ousárão avançar além da villa d'Abiul; e, muito melhor ainda,
tornárão a tomar o caminho que primeiramente havião seguido.

Então o Infante, e os fidalgos que vinhão com elle, aconselhárão
ElRei que ficasse em seu reino como lhe fôra determinado, ou que fosse
com elles para Castella. ElRei escolheo não ficar em Portugal.

Depois d'esta vergonhosa fugida, quasi nenhuns fidalgos ficárão n'este
reino que não seguissem o partido do Conde de Bolonha; porque, emfim,
era Portuguez, filho de seu Rei natural, homem prudente e de bom
governo. Mas quanto ás praças fortes, os Alcaides estavão tão constantes
em sua lealdade que quasi não havia quem o recebesse de bom grado, por
causa do juramento. Só Fernando de Taíde, Alcaide mor de Leiria, foi
quem recebeo no seu castello o Conde de Bolonha, e por causa d'este
unico facto, ficou reputado por infame entre os homens d'aquelle tempo.
O author do _Nobiliario_ ou livro das linhagens de Portugal, o Conde de
Barcellos, o proprio neto do Conde de Bolonha, nota de traidores e
cobardes a Sueiro Bezerra e seus filhos, porque, esquecendo-se de sua
homenagem a ElRei D. Sancho, entregárão certas fortalezas que
commandavão na provincia da Beira, e isto sem serem cercados.

Mas nem todos os Alcaides fizerão o mesmo e eis-aqui como se portárão
com o Conde de Bolonha os que commandávão em Celorico, e se conservavão
pelo antigo Rei na cidade de Coimbra.

Fernando Roíz Pacheco era Alcaide commandante da primeira d'estas
fortalezas na Beira, mas tinha-se sempre recusado a entregar as chaves
d'ella ao Regente, de sorte que o Conde, nada podendo concluir, nem com
affabilidade, nem com promessas, lhe veio pôr cerco diante do castello.
Muitos ataques fôrão renovados, mas, graças á fortaleza do logar, e á
bravura da gente que Pacheco tinha comsigo, as forças do Conde
estacárão, e o cerco durou tanto tempo, que os víveres vierão a faltar
aos de dentro. Virão-se então estes bem depressa reduzidos a uma tal
extremidade pela fome, que, para não morrerem de uma morte desesperada,
se achavão promptos a entregar a fortaleza.

Estando a ponto de soffrer esta vergonha, conta-se que Fernando Roiz se
levantára um dia muito de madrugada, e que entrára a andar pelas
trincheiras. Submergido em diversos pensamentos, não sabendo já, n'uma
tal situação, a que se resolvesse, pedíra a Deus, que, por sua
misericordia, o soccorresse n'um tal trabalho, e que sobre tudo lhe
poupasse a vergonha, impedindo-o de entregar o castello a quem o não
devia fazer.

Em quanto elle estava n'estas imaginações, vio levantar-se das praias do
Mondego, que corre mui perto d'ali, uma aguia que levava nas garras uma
truta mui grande. Como o passaro tomasse o vôo por cima do castello, eis
que a truta cahio sobre as trincheiras. Fernando Roiz ficou um pouco
alegre com este acontecimento. Depois uma idéa lhe occorreo de repente:
vendo aquella truta tão bella, e tão fresca, mandou-a preparar, e meter
n'uma empada, e depois enviou-a de presente ao Conde de Bolonha;
mandando-lhe dizer que bem podia sustentar o cerco, quanto tempo fosse
da sua vontade; mas que se era por fome que esperava que elle se
rendesse, houvesse de considerar o que devião fazer pessoas d'aquella
maneira providas, e com taes iguarias, accrescentando que era pouco
provavel que o vissem entregar o castello contra a sua honra. O Conde, e
os que estavão presentes, ficárão extremamente maravilhados, não sabendo
como isto tinha podido acontecer. Vendo, pois, que de prolongar o cerco
nada de bom lhe resultaria, o Regente se retirou com o seu exercito.

Eis-aqui o feito do bom subdito.

Não restava em Portugal, da parte de D. Sancho, senão o castello de
Coimbra: mas era a fortaleza mais honrosa do reino, porque esta cidade
tinha o titulo de capital, e servia de residencia aos Reis. Quem ali
governava era D. Martim de Freitas, Cavalleiro muito famoso, e de
illustre ascendencia. Tendo o Conde feito todas as diligencias possiveis
com elle para que lhe entregasse a praça, antes de recorrer ás armas,
Freitas o desenganou de taes esperanças, e lhe disse: que em quanto
vivesse ElRei D. Sancho, nada lhe seria entregue sem sua ordem; e que
para elle, D. Martim, a morte ou os máos tratamentos erão cousa menos de
temer que a deslealdade. Que portanto podia dispensar-se de lhe meter
medo com a morte, ou com outros perigos, porque estava decidido a
soffrer tudo; e que, finalmente, elle não estava no mundo para fazer
estado da vida, mas sim para ganhar honra, e para a conservar. O Conde
pôz o cerco, e fez atacar muitas vezes o castello.

Tanto valor se mostrou de ambas as partes, que de ambas igualmente houve
ali grande numero de mortos e feridos; e ainda que os combates se
renovassem, o alentado esforço do Alcaide e de seus companheiros era
tal, que bem pouco servio o trabalho dos sitiantes. O Conde, indignado,
fez solemne juramento de não levantar o cerco em quanto não obtivesse o
castello por assalto ou por fome. Tanto elle perseverou, que as
provisões e a agua começárão a faltar aos de dentro; chegárão até a
comer as bestas de carga, os cães, e os gatos, e outras cousas
desusadas, a que repugna o natural do homem. O Conde, sabendo em que
miseria estavão, e sentindo-se pesaroso de que homens tão corajosos
soffressem tanto, lhes mandou pedir que se rendessem, dizendo-lhes, que,
sem causa, se não matassem a si proprios; que não tinhão razão de crer
que aquillo fosse proeza, que antes era loucura, porque nada poderião
conseguir. D. Martim de Freitas respondeo, que, pela sua honra, não
desistiria do designio em que estava.

Achando-se estes Cavalleiros, pois, em grande tristeza, eis que do alto
do castello virão passar um Cavalleiro que a váo atravessava o Mondego,
e cujo cavallo, saciado, de nenhuma maneira lhe importava beber.
Magoados de se verem em tal estado, que até inveja tinhão de uma besta,
começárão a lamentar-se, a dizer mal da sua sorte; e entre os que assim
fallavão, havia parentes e amigos do Alcaide. Considerando o trabalho
que soffrião, e a necessidade em que se achavão, sem esperança de ajuda
ou soccorro, e meditando, além d'isso em que D. Martim era o unico que
perseverava n'aquella obstinação, lhe disserão, que para terem vida,
elle e os seus, era preciso entregar o castello. D. Martim lhes
respondeo: "Deus não permitta que eu obedeça a um tal conselho, e que
haja uma similhante nodoa na minha honra!" Elle accrescentou que não
consentiria jámais n'uma traição igual á que lhe sería preciso
commetter, se entregasse o castello a outro que não fosse aquelle de
quem o recebêra em fé e homenagem; que um tal dever se não quebraria,
pelo menos em quanto elle vivesse; que bem via a tribulação em que
estavão com elle, e que a sua era maior, porque sentia o mal geral e o
seu; mas que, se querião lembrar-se dos males, ainda maiores, que alguns
cercados tinhão padecido para manter a sua lealdade, elles
soffrerião com mais paciencia. Deus queira, pela sua misericordia,
continuou elle, soccorrer-vos, e fazer-vos sahir promptamente d'este
trabalho. Algum dia vos alegrareis de ter para contar a vossos filhos os
males que tendes supportado, e isto não será para elles uma fraca honra,
nem uma fraca instrucção para a vossa descendencia. Hia-lhes tambem
recordando, que, se obtendo alguma cousa de beber e de comer, elles
salvavão sua vida, esta vida devia ser curta, mas que a infamia de não
ter acabado com gloria cousa tão bem começada, duraria sempre. Demais,
que tudo o que lhes pedia, era que, como homens que mais amavão o
espirito do que a carne, o ajudassem, e não o deixassem á revelia, ao
menos em quanto isto estivesse em seu poder. Finalisou com estas
palavras: "O trabalho e a paciencia tem sido communs, a gloria seja
tambem igual para todos." D. Martim de Freitas, para mais abonar a firme
resolução em que estava, disse ainda "que a honra de sua filha lhe era
mui chara, mas que mais depressa cederia de sua virgindade, que
entregaria a fortaleza de Coimbra." Depois que D. Martim proferira estas
palavras, ficárão como assombrados do seu zêlo, louvárão sua bondade,
tomárão elles mesmos novo animo, e prometterão-lhe de satisfazer o seu
desejo, tivesse ou não razão; accrescentando que em nenhuma
circumstancia o abandonarião, e que antes succumbirião todos que
faltarem a esta promessa.

O Cavalleiro e os seus continuavão a estar n'esta posição difficil,
havendo já comtudo perto de um anno que ElRei D. Sancho tinha hido para
Castella. Mas n'aquella epocha o Conde de Bolonha recebeo noticia certa
da morte de seu irmão, e sentindo-se magoado da perda de tantos homens
de bem, e admirado de tão grande lealdade, lhes enviou munições de
boca, assim como refrescos. Mandou tambem juntamente uma mensagem para o
Alcaide, em que lhe participava que ElRei era morto, e que se elle
queria pessoalmente informar-se d'isso, lhe permittia a elle, Martim de
Freitas, a hida a Castella, e a volta á fortaleza, sem que, durante a
jornada, tivesse receio de algum ataque da sua parte.

D. Martim foi a Toledo, e bem que soubesse de todos que ElRei D. Sancho
era morto, bem que lhe mostrassem onde estava enterrado, ainda isto o
não satisfez. Para adquirir mais certeza fez levantar a pedra que o
cobria, e quando conheceo bem que era elle, diz-se, que, diante de
numerosas testimunhas, quiz satisfazer todas as promessas d'homenagem:
pôz as proprias chaves da fortaleza no braço direito d'ElRei D. Sancho,
e authenticando esse facto com notarios publicos, de quem requerêra a
presença, fez fechar o tumulo.

De volta para Coimbra, entrou de noite, e em segredo, no castello: foi
d'ali que no dia seguinte, de manhã, enviou a dizer ao Conde, já
reconhecido Rei, que fosse tomar posse da praça, que elle D. Martim de
Freitas podia entregar-lhe. ElRei se dirigio á fortaleza, e foi o mesmo
Alcaide quem lh'a abrio. Então, pegando pela mão de sua mulher e filhos,
os pôz fora, dizendo-lhes:

--Deixemos este castello a quem pertence. Depois, pondo um joelho em
terra diante do Rei, e pegando nas chaves da praça, lh'as offertou,
pronunciando estas palavras:

--Senhor, pois que aprouve a Deus que D. Sancho, vosso irmão, morresse,
tomai as vossas chaves e o vosso castello. D'ora em diante vos terei por
meu Rei e Senhor; e ao mesmo tempo mostrou a Affonso as escripturas
que mandára fazer em Toledo, para sua honra e descargo.

Um Cavalleiro que estava presente o interrogou, dizendo: Porque não
pedia perdão a ElRei de todos os desgostos que lhe havia causado, e do
aggravo que lhe fizera, deixando matar e ferir tanta gente, e negando
por tanto tempo ao seu Soberano a entrada de uma praça que era sua.

Como D. Martim de Freitas quizesse desculpar-se, e mostrar que
similhante cousa se não devia esperar d'elle, ElRei acudio promptamente
em seu soccorro, dizendo que D. Martim não tinha de que pedir perdão;
que não commettêra falta alguma; que antes, bem ao contrario, a sua
acção valorosa era de louvar, digna de um bom Cavalleiro, e de um
fidalgo leal; e que em memoria d'este feito lhe entregava o castello,
para que elle e seus descendentes o guardassem, sem que elle nem seus
successores fossem obrigados ao juramento de fidelidade.

D. Martim respondeo a ElRei que olhava esta offerta como uma grande
mercê, mas que de nenhum modo a acceitava; e que amaldiçoava seus
filhos, seus netos, e todos os seus descendentes, se por um castello
chegassem a prestar homenagem ao Rei, ou a qualquer outro individuo.

Eis-aqui o que era a lealdade Portugueza.

FIM.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of O Máo Rei e o Bom Subdito, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK O MÁO REI E O BOM SUBDITO ***

***** This file should be named 29898-8.txt or 29898-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/8/9/29898/

Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
