The Project Gutenberg EBook of Galleria dos Vice-reis e Governadores da
India Portugueza, by José Maria Delorme Colaço

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Galleria dos Vice-reis e Governadores da India Portugueza

Author: José Maria Delorme Colaço

Release Date: September 15, 2009 [EBook #29995]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GALLERIA DOS VICE-REIS ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)





GALLERIA

DOS

VICE-REIS, E GOVERNADORES

DA

INDIA PORTUGUEZA

DEDICADA AOS ILLUSTRES DESCENDENTES DE TAES

HEROES

POR

José Maria Delorme Colaço

CAVALLEIRO DA ORDEM MILITAR DE S. FERNANDO DE 1.ª CLASSE, DA AMERICANA
DE IZABEL A CATHOLICA, E CAPITAM DE INFANTARIA AJUDANTE D'ORDENS DO
EX.mo BARÃO DO CANDAL, GOVERNADOR GERAL DOS ESTADOS DA INDIA.

EM 1839 E 1840.

LISBOA:

TYPOGRAPHIA DE A. S. COELHO.--RUA DO OUTEIRO N.º 4.

1841.




AO PUBLICO.


Esta Galleria he formada pela copêa exacta, e minucioza dos grandes[1]
Retratos que existem nas salas do Palacio do Governo em
Pamgim, acompanhada de um rezumo Historico sobre os factos mais notaveis
de cada um.

Não querendo fazer elogio a meu pincel, pois que apenas tem sido
exercitado em Dezenhos militares, advirto o benigno Publico; que a
multidão de irregularidades, e erros, que aprezenta a maior parte destes
Retratos, são os mesmos que lá estão, julgando eu nisto conservar-lhe o
merecimento, e não ser obra de fanthazia.--

O grande empenho, que nesta Collecção mostrão os especuladores
Extrangeiros, me faz acreditar ser um bem, e honra, que primeiro
aparececem na propria Patria do que em Paiz extranho.--

    [1] Tem 8 pés de alto e 4 de largo.




_N.º 1_

[Gravura: Vice-Rey D. Francisco d'Almeida]


_Vice-Rey_
_D. Francisco d'Almeida_.

O Vice-Rei D. Francisco de Almeida foi para a Azia no anno 1505 e
chegando em Septembro a Angediva forteficou aquella pequena Ilha: Foi ás
terras de Canará aonde se demorou, destruio a Cidade de Dabul, mandou
fazer uma Fortaleza em Cananor, e outra em Cochim, sendo ordinariamente
sua rezidencia neste ultimo ponto--Foi o primeiro que com o Titulo de
Vice-Rei governou os Estados da India em cujo Governo esteve até 18 de
Novembro de 1509.

De volta para a Europa morreo na Agoada do Saldanha ás mãos dos Cafres,
no 1.º de Março de 1510.




_N.º 2_

[Gravura: Governador Affonso de Albuquerque]


_Governador_
_Affonso de Albuquerque_.

O Governador Affonso de Albuquerque, o Grande Heroe da Azia succedeo
como Governador em 18 de Novembro, de 1509 ao V. R. D. Francisco de Almeida.

Tomou a Ilha e Cidade de Gôa aos Mouros em 17 de Fevereiro de 1510; que
sendo logo depois retomada pelo Idal-Kan tornou a conquista-la em 25 de
Novembro do mesmo anno. Ganhou Ormuz e Malaca--Mandou construir as
Fortalezas de Calicut, e Gôa--Descubrio as Ilhas de Bandó, e Maluco.

De volta de Ormuz faleceo na Barra de Goa em Dezembro de 1515.

Os seus restos primeiro depositados na Igreja de N. Senhora do monte da
Serra (que elle mandou edeficar em cumprimento de voto feito pelo
livramento de sua náo N. Senhora da Serra que deo em um baixo junto á
Ilha de Camarão no mar roxo) forão transportados para Lisboa em 1556 com
bastante saudade, e opposição dos habitantes de Goa.




_N.º 3_

[Gravura: Governador Lopo Soares de Albergaria]


_Governador_
_Lopo Soares de Albergaria._

O Governador Lopo Soares de Albergaria succedeo ao Governador Affonso de
Albuquerque em Dezembro de 1515--Foi ao Porto Judá, e avassalou seo
Rei--Forteficou Ceilão, e fez seo Rei tributario--Governou até 1518 em
que voltou para Portugal.




_N.º 4_

[Gravura: Governador Diogo Lopes de Sequeira]


_Governador_
_Diogo Lopes de Sequeira._

O Governador Diogo Lopes de Sequeira, succedeo ao Governador Lopo Soares
de Albergaria no anno do 1518--Entrou no estreito do mar
roxo,--Forteficou Chaul--Governou até Janeiro 1522 e voltou ao Reino--




_N.º 5_

[Gravura: Governador D. Duarte de Menezes]


_Governador_
_D. Duarte de Menezes._

O Governador D. Duarte de Menezes, Senhor da caza de Tarouca, succedeo
ao Governador Diogo Lopes de Sequeira em Janeiro de 1522--

Mandou construir a Fortaleza de S. João de Tornate em Maluco, e voltou
para o Reino em 1524.--




_N.º 6_

[Gravura: Vice-Rey D. Vasco da Gamma]


_Vice-Rey_
_D. Vasco da Gamma._

O Vice-Rei D. Vasco da Gama, Conde Almirante dos mares da India,
succedeo ao Governador D. Duarte de Menezes no anno de 1524.--

Foi quem em 1499 descubrio a India--Seo nome bastou para afugentar os
Piratas, respeitar o nome Portuguez, e restabellecer a ordem--Faleceo
em Cochim quatro mezes depois de sua chegada.--

Foi o primeiro que levou vias de successão.--




_N.º 7_

[Gravura: Governador D. Henrique de Menezes]


_Governador_
_D. Henrique de Menezes._

O Governador D. Henrique de Menezes (o Roxo), succedeo em Via de
successão ao Vice-Rei D. Vasco da Gamma no anno de 1525.==

Soccorreo Calicut contra todas as Forças do Samorim e o derrotou.==

Faleceo em Cananor em 1526, com 28 annos de idade.==




_N.º 8_

[Gravura: Governador Lopo Vaz de Sampaio]


_Governador_
_Lopo Vaz de Sampaio._

O Governador Lopo Vaz de Sampaio, succedeo em 3.ª via de successão (de
D. Vasco da Gamma) ao Governador Henrique de Menezes, porque o que lhe
succedia era em 2.ª Via, D. Pedro Mascarenhas, e este se achava
Governando Malaca: Quando o refferido Mascarenhas quiz tomar conta do
Governo, aquelle Governador o prendeo, e mandou para Lisboa aonde foi
recebido por El-Rei (D. João 3.º) com grandes honras e particular amizade==

Em seu tempo forão tomadas Redor, e Mangalor, e Ilha de
Mahim.==Desbaratou os malabares commandados por Alixá Capitam de Cambaia.==

Foi por ordem da Corte remetido prezo para Lisboa aonde esteve a ferros
na Cadêa, e tendo sido sentenceado ao degredo de Nobreza, e indemnização
a D. Pedro Mascarenhas refugiou-se para Castella.




_N.º 9_

[Gravura: Governador Nuno da Cunha]


_Governador_
_Nuno da Cunha._

O Governador Nuno da Cunha, succedeo ao Governador Lopo Vaz de Sampaio
no anno de 1529==Tomou a cidade de Baçahim ao Bahadur-xá, de Guzarate, e
a Ilha de Dio que soffreo depois um grande cerco (o primeiro) de Solimão
Bachá, que foi desbaratado por Antonio da Silveira com 600 Portuguezes==

Depois de nove annos e 10 mezes falleceo na viagem de volta para o Reino==

Governou até Novembro 1538==




_N.º 10_

[Gravura: Vice-Rey D. Garcia de Noronha]


_Vice-Rey_
_D. Garcia de Noronha._

O Vice-Rei D. Garcia de Noronha succedeo ao Governador Nuno da Cunha, em
Novembro de 1538==

Foi junto a Dio com uma armada inquietar os inimigos do Estado que
fugirão==

Governou até 28 de Abril 1540.




_N.º 11_

[Gravura: Governador D. Estevão da Gamma]


_Governador_
_D. Estevão da Gamma._

O Governador D. Estevão da Gamma, filho do Heroe d'este nome succedeo em
2.ª via de sucessão ao Vice-Rei D. Garcia de Noronha em 28 d'Abril de
1540==Foi em uma grande Armada ao Estreito, destruio a Cidade de Saquem,
e de Alcacer, saqueou a Cidade de Toro, e passou a Suez, visitou o Monte
Sinay, aonde armou muitos Cavalleiros==Deixou seu irmão D. Christovão em
soccorro a Preste João, governou por successão dous annos e um mez, e
foi para o Reino.==




_N.º 12_

[Gravura: Governador Martim Affonso de Souza]


_Governador_
_Martim Affonso de Souza._

O Governador Martim Affonso de Sousa succedeo ao Governador D. Estevão
da Gamma em 11 de Maio de 1542==Destruio Batuda==Em seu tempo se
descobrio o Japão==o Reino de Maluco se sujeitou á Corôa de Portugal, e
se unirão ao Estado a Alfandega de Ormuz, e as Peninsulas de Salcete e
Bardez==Governou 3 annos e 4 mezes, e foi para o Reino.




_N.º 13_

[Gravura: Governador D. João de Castro]


_Governador_
_D. João de Castro._

O Governador D. João de Castro chamado vulgarmente==o ultimo Heroe
Portuguez na India==succedeu ao Governador Martim Affonso de Sousa em
Setembro de 1545==Igualou seus mais illustres antecessores por suas
virtudes, e gloria que adquiriu como guerreiro, e como estadista==No seu
tempo aconteceu o celebre 2.º cerco de Diu, aonde os portuguezes
commandados pelo Governador D. João de Mascarenhas fizerão
heroicidades==socorreu Diu==Destroçou todo o grande poder do inimigo
Mahomet Rei de Guzarate chamado vulgarmente==de Cambaia==e entrou
triunfante em Goa==Tornou a Diu, e de caminho apresentou batalha ao Rei
de Barache, destruiu toda a sua Corte e a do Hidalcão, cujo exercito
depois derrotou nos Campos de Salcete, e segurou para a Coroa Portugueza
aquella Peninsula, e a de Bardez==Tão fiel e respeitada era a sua
palavra que tendo mandado uns cabellos do seu bigode em penhor de 20$000
Xerafins que pediu para a despeza da reedificação da Praça de Diu, lhe
forão tornados com respeito, e se lhe deu muito mais do que
pedia==Depois de um feliz Governo de 2 annos e 8 mezes, havendo sido
premiado com o titulo de Vice-Rei, faleceu em Goa, universalmente
chorado aos 6 de Julho de 1548 nos braços do Santo Francisco Xavier, e
tão pobre que o Senado se vio obrigado a fazer as despezas dos seus
poucos alimentos nos ultimos dias, e do funeral! Foi enterrado com pompa
mais lastimosa que solemne na Igreja de S. Francisco da Cidade.




_N.º 14_

[Gravura: Governador Garcia de Sá]


_Governador_
_Garcia de Sá._

O Governador D. Garcia de Sá succedeu em via ao Vice-Rei D. João de
Castro em 6 de Julho de 1548. Em seu tempo se fez christaõ, o Rei de
Tanor, que veio a Goa==Governou até ao mez de Julho de 1549==Está
sepultado na Igreja de Nossa Senhora do Rosario.




_N.º 15_

[Gravura: Governador Jorge Cabral]


_Governador Jorge Cabral._

O Governador Jorge Cabral succedeo ao Governador Garcia de Sá em Julho
de 1549==Destruio as Cidades de Capoçale, Tiracole, e Panane; e tendo
todos os Principes de Malabar cercados em Bardelá, no dia em que havia
de dar batalha, chegou o Vice-Rei D. Affonso de Noronha==Governou um
anno e quatro mezes até (1551) e voltou para o Reino.




_N.º 16_

[Gravura: Vice-Rei. Afonso de Noronha]


_Vice-Rei. Afonso de Noronha._

O Vice-Rei D. Affonso de Noronha succedeo ao Governador Jorge Cabral==No
seu tempo se tomou aos Turcos a Fortaleza de Catifá, e nove
galés==alcançou grande victoria contra o Rei de Java que cercou a dita
fortaleza==Em seu tempo esteve na India o Poeta Luis de Camões==Depois
de 4 annos de Governo voltou para o Reino.




_N.º 17_

[Gravura: Vice-Rei D. Pedro Mascarenhas]


_Vice-Rei_
_D. Pedro Mascarenhas._

Vice-Rei, D. Pedro de Mascarenhas.==Estribeiro-Mór d'El-Rei D. João 3.º,
e seu Embaixador em diversas Cortes da Europa.==Tendo governado apenas 4
mezes, falleceu em Gôa em Junho de 1555.




_N.º 18_

[Gravura: Governador Francisco Barreto]


_Governador_
_Francisco Barreto._

Francisco Barreto.--Era Governador de Baçaim, quando succedeu na
governança da India, em vias de successão, no anno de 1555; e não foi
rendido senão em 1558, voltando então para o Reino.==Tomou na India as
Fortalezas de Assoines, e Mannorá,--e veio a fallecer em Africa, na
Fortaleza de Tete, no anno de 1574, sendo então Governador do Monopotapa.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Galleria dos Vice-reis e Governadores
da India Portugueza, by José Maria Delorme Colaço

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GALLERIA DOS VICE-REIS ***

***** This file should be named 29995-8.txt or 29995-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/9/9/29995/

Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
