The Project Gutenberg EBook of Manifesto dos Estudantes da Universidade de
Coimbra á opinião illustrada do paiz, by Antero de Quental

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Manifesto dos Estudantes da Universidade de Coimbra á opinião illustrada do paiz

Author: Antero de Quental

Editor: Rodrigo Veloso

Release Date: September 15, 2009 [EBook #29996]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MANIFESTO DOS ESTUDANTES ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)





                             ANTHERO DE QUENTAL




                             ANTHERO DE QUENTAL


                        MANIFESTO DOS ESTUDANTES DA
                          UNIVERSIDADE DE COIMBRA

                       Á OPINIÃO ILLUSTRADA DO PAIZ

                               *1862-1863*




                                BARCELLOS
                    Typographia da _Aurora do Cavado_
                              Editor--_R. V._
                                  1896



    Tiragem apenas de 100 exemplares:
    20 em papel de linho,
    80 em papel d'algodão.
    N.º___




O Visconde de S. Jeronimo, Bazilio Alberto de Sousa Pinto, por longos
annos lente da Faculdade de Direito na Universidade, era seu reitor, e
já desde tempos, no anno lectivo de 1862 a 1863. O antigo liberal de
1820, deputado ás Constituintes de 1821, esquecera, parece, nos fins de
sua vida, os principios com que a inaugurara na scena politica, e
tornára-se profundamente antipathico á Academia, sobre a qual fazia
pesar todo o rigor da obsoleta legislação universitaria, a mais
incongruente, tirannica e injustificavel de todas as legislações, cujos
artigos draconianos têm resistido a todas as evoluções da sciencia do
direito e a todas as conquistas da civilisação, recordação ominosa,
tetrica e funebre das edades inquisitoriaes.

E conhecendo bem o Visconde de S. Jeronimo a existencia d'essa
antipathia, e que de dia para dia se ia ella exarcerbando, rasgando cada
vez mais fundo abysmo insuperavel entre a Academia e elle, em lugar de
algo fazer para a diminuir, se não extinguir, punha todo o seu empenho
no contrario provocando em tudo e por tudo, sempre que para isso se lhe
deparava ensejo, o exaspero dos animos dos estudantes.

A tal ponto se foram, em essa maneira, apurando as cousas, que
deliberada a grande maioria da Academia a dar ao reitor um testemunho
bem solemne e frisante de sua incompatibilidade com este, para
realisação d'elle foi aprasado o dia 8 de Desembro de 1862, por occasião
da solemne distribuição dos premios aos estudantes laureados da
Universidade, para a qual, desde longuissima data, destinado e
consagrado o dia 8 de desembro em que a egreja commemora a Conceição de
Maria, decretada por D. João 4.º Padroeira do Reino, e Protectora da
Universidade.

Effectivamente n'esse dia inteiramente apinhada de estudantes a
vastissima sala dos Capellos, onde a solemnidade da distribuição dos
premios se soe realisar, apenas o Visconde de S. Jeronimo começou de
falar, na sua qualidade de reitor, inteiramente se evacuou o amplo
recinto de todos os estudantes, que o enchiam, voltando-lhe as costas a
immensa mole de batinas, que reunida no pateo da Universidade,
enthusiasticos vivas soltou á liberdade.

O echo immenso que d'este notabilissimo acontecimento então resoou em
toda a Coimbra e naturalmente se repercutiu por todo o reino, e as
apreciações diversas que d'elle foram feitas, motivaram o _Manifesto dos
estudantes de Coimbra á opinião illustrada do paiz_, impresso e
profusamente distribuido. Elaborou-o Anthero de Quental, e este o motivo
por que o trazemos a esta colleccão de seus trabalhos dispersos.

                                                        Rodrigo Velloso




MANIFESTO DOS ESTUDANTES DA UNIVERSIDADE DE COIMBRA
Á OPINIÃO ILLUSTRADA DO PAIZ
1862-1863


Ao Governo, aos homens desinteressados e liberaes d'esta terra, vamos
dar razão do nosso procedimento. Oiçam-nos. Pedimos um quarto de hora de
attenção: não é muito que ao prazer e ao interesse se roubem alguns
minutos para attender á voz da mocidade de um paiz. Essa voz parte
d'alma: é a voz da eterna justiça.

Todo o facto pede uma explicação. Se o acontecimento é grave, graves
devem ser os motivos que o produziram; e, mais que ninguem, homens
novos, quando deliberam, pódem sim enganar-se, mas a intenção é sempre
generosa e nobre.

Pergunta-se hoje em Coimbra, pergunta-se por todo o paiz:--Que querem os
Estudantes da Universidade de Coimbra? Que significa a evacuação da sala
dos Capêllos no dia 8 de dezembro de 1862? Que protesto é esse d'uma
corporação contra o seu chefe?

Os Estudantes não são meia duzia de crianças turbulentas que, n'uma hora
de galhofa, se combinem para pregar uma peça ingraçada; tantos homens
não só intendem, como um bando de rapazes de escola, só com o fim de se
divertirem á custa de uma coisa muito séria. Não foi, pois, o prurido da
infancia o motor d'aquelle acontecimento. Esta hypothese nem se discute.
O bom senso da nação regeita-a como uma offensa feita a si mesma na
pessoa dos seus melhores filhos.

Os Estudantes não são, tão pouco, instrumentos cegos de vinganças
pessoaes, trabalhando á luz do dia, mas movidos por um braço occulto na
sombra. São instrumentos sim, mas da propria causa. O braço que os
impelle não vem de cima, nem vem de baixo o impulso que os leva. Escutam
a voz da consciencia e obram.

Os estudantes não são _discolos_, _amotinadores_, _facciosos_ ou
_assassinos_. Pois o leite que se bebe no seio das mãis,
transformar-se-ia em veneno ao primeiro sorvo do ar de Coimbra? Pois
estará tão gangrenado este paiz que o seu coração--um coração de vinte
annos--só abrigue odios e trevas? orgulho e miseria? Pois será esta a
esperança do futuro? Ah! a nação também é mãi; não póde calumniar seus
filhos.

A evacuação da sala dos Capêllos no dia 8 de dezembro de 1862, o
protesto da Academia contra o Reitor da Universidade deve, como todo o
facto, ter um motivo e um fim. Partido de uma corporação onde o paiz
reconhece o melhor, o mais puro de seu sangue, deve, mais que nenhum,
ter um motivo justo, um fim grave e elevado.

Os que sobre nós lançam o estigma de amotinadores são esses os primeiros
a reconhecel-o. Pois se assim não fosse, se contra si não temessem a
justiça da nossa causa, com que motivo adulterar os factos para depois
os combater? Quem calumnia, quem cria um fantasma para ter a esteril
gloria de o derrubar ante os olhos do paiz, é que teme luctar com a
verdade, é que sabe que o venceria a verdade, se a confessasse.

Porque os factos foram adulterados. Debaixo da capa do anonymo fomos
calumniados por cobardes que á luz do dia não se atrevem a dar com o seu
nome garantia ás suas palavras. Julgou a boa fé dos nossos vinte annos
que em questão tão grave sobrenadaria a justiça e a verdade acima da
onda lamacenta do interesse pessoal, da calumnia, das miserias d'uma ou
d'outra facção.

Foi ainda um engano. A boa fé do jornalismo do paiz foi tambem
ludubriada. Quizeram desacredital-o, desacreditando-nos, fazendo-lhe
repetir o que a melevolencia d'alguem lhe segredou em hora d'estulta
inspiração.

Como homens, filhos d'esta época de liberdade, lamentamos que uma
instituição que amamos, porque é a educadora dos povos, a mãi das nações
livres, que a imprensa fosse enganada por falsos informadores e, ainda
sem o querer, mentisse uma vez á sua missão. Mas, como membros de uma
corporação, é do nosso dever, é da nossa honra aceitar a luva que nos
lançam, e esclarecer a opinião, salvando d'esta injustiça a imprensa
portugueza.

Os Estudantes sairam da sala dos Capêllos, mas não sairam amotinados.
Viraram sómente costas a um homem que não amam nem respeitam, porque se
não sabe fazer nem respeitado nem amado. Ficar é que seria crime, porque
fôra uma baixeza.

Os Estudantes, reunidos no terreiro da Universidade, deram vivas á
independencia, vivas á liberdade, mas não tumultuaram, não se
revolucionaram, não deram morras, não pediram a cabeça de ninguem; por
que os Estudantes sabem que a cabeça de qualquer homem é sagrada; por
que nossas mãis não nos insinaram a soletrar em seus olhos a religião do
amor, para nós virmos aqui transformarmo-nos em bandidos e homicidas, e
a essa religião transformal-a em lei de morte.

A nós córar-nos-iam as faces de vergonha por este povo, se em Portugal
um só homem ousasse tal acreditar.

Não se pediu a morte de ninguem, não se perturbou um acto solemne com
vozes nem tumultos. Evacuou-se uma sala com o socego que tal evacuação
comporta. Depois--fóra, no meio da praça-deram-se vivas á liberdade por
que não sabiamos ainda aqui que esta palavra tivesse sido riscada, por
ordem do Geral dos jesuitas, do diccionario politico d'esta nação.

Que infamia commetteram os Estudantes da Universidade, saindo d'uma sala
onde não podiam ficar, sob pena de ouvirem cousas desagradaveis para o
seu brio, da bôca de um homem que se compraz em os amesquinhar?

Que crime commetteram, n'um paiz liberal, os filhos dos homens do
Mindello, dando vivas á liberdade?

Sabemos manifestar-nos contra uma authoridade, nos limites da ordem e da
lei. Ordem e lei, em terra de livres, não são circulo tão estreito que
se não possa dar um passo sem lhes sahir logo da peripheria.

É esta a verdade. Para a restabelecer temos ainda voz que se erga, fale
e se escute em todos os Angulos d'esta terra. Falamos: que nos oiça a
nação: que a nação são nossos paes, são nossas mãis, é o coração de
nossas familias, e aos vinte annos não se apprendeu ainda a linguagem da
mentira para fallar a um pae e a uma mãi. A verdade é esta. Que se
levante alguem e, arrojando a mascara villan do anonymo, se atreva a
desmentir-nos!

Eis o facto. Agora os motivos d'elle.

Que tem o Reitor da Universidade que mereça tal desapprovação?

Respondam por nós os jornaes do paiz que, ha tres annos, não cessam de
registrar em suas columnas factos sobre factos, iniquidades e miserias.
Respondam as representações, os pedidos de justiça, que cada acto seu
tem promovido. Responda o corpo cathedratico, onde raras vozes amigas
incontra a apoial-o. Responda a rectidão de nossas intenções,--de nós,
que o accusamos, que somos moços, e não erguemos a voz contra um homem
sem razão, sem muita razão.

Póde suppor-se que o corpo docente da Universidade, que devemos julgar
prudente e illustrado; que a mocidade portugueza, que abriga no coração
tanta rectidão e justiça; que o jornalismo, echo da opinião publica; que
sciencia, nobreza d'intenções, prudencia e illustração: que tanta gente,
e da melhor, em tão diversos sitios, sem se passarem palavra, sem um fim
qualquer, se conspire e combine contra um homem, o accuse e guerreie...
e que esse homem não tenha dado motivo a esta declaração de guerra? Pode
suppor-se isto?

Se assim fosse, se a nação suppozesse tal do que tem melhor em si... que
idea formariamos então da opinião publica, da moral d'este paiz?

É uma hypothese que se não discute. Estranho caso, em verdade, é
incontrar na historia o fado de um homem grande, menosprezado, accusado
injustamente por tudo quanto tem em si de melhor uma nação. Será o
Reitor da Universidade o Colombo que nós todos desconheçamos?... Que lhe
responda a consciencia.

Mas não é só contra o Reitor, o sr. Doutor Basilio Alberto de Souza
Pinto, que nos manifestamos, contra a authoridade que não cumpre com o
dever da justiça, o primeiro e unico que lhe impõe o seu cargo. Ha aqui
mais alguma cousa, e alguma cousa peior. Gememos sob o jugo de uma
legislação iniqua, porque é velha; necessariamente injusta, porque é
confusa. Cumpre ao Reitor adoçar-lhe o rigor, e, no meio da liberdade
que tal confusão lhe dá, escolher sempre em harmonia com a idea do
seculo, que é a Justiça.

É isso que elle não comprehende, é isso que elle não quer; e é contra
isto que nós protestamos.

Se uma vez não applica a lei, se muitas vezes é o arbitrio o seu unico
codigo, é isto mau. Mas quando trata de a cumprir, quando é justo, como
executor da lei, porque se escuda com ella, incarnar em si todo o rigor
da velha instituição, tirar-lhe as ultimas consequencias, ter na sua mão
uma espada, e, podendo escolher entre o gume e as costas, preferir o
gume... isto é peior, por que isto é pessimo.

A manifestação contra o Reitor da Universidade é tambem protesto contra
a iniquidade d'uma legislação atrasada de tres seculos, porque este
Reitor symbolisa todo o rigor d'essa lei, porque consubstancia em si
tudo quanto ha de mau na instituição.

A lei pesa sobre nossas cabeças com o peso de muitos annos, mas o Reitor
carrega ainda, com todo o pêso da sua mão, sobre o já enorme da lei, e
quer-nos esmagar sob a pressão immensa dos annos e do rigor ainda.

Um e outro jugo nos é odioso; contra ambos protestamos.

O Reitor que deu lugar a vermos, em toda a sua fealdade, a injustiça da
instituição, abriu caminho a que, manifestando-nos contra elle, nos
manifestassemos contra ella tambem.

São esses os nossos motivos. É este o duplo sentido do nosso protesto.

Em quanto ao fim é claro, depois d'isto, qual elle seria.

Substituir a voz dos opprimidos, forte porque parte d'um coração
torturado, á voz da imprensa--essa defensora dos que soffrem, sim, mas
que não póde erguer-se tanto, porque não pede em causa propria. O jornal
fala, mas como quem discute; perde-se-lhe a voz no meio do tumultuar dos
muitos interesses que por aí se agitam. Nós falamos, com o brado dos
opprimidos, que todos escutam, que todos devem escutar, porque ninguem
negará aos filhos dos heroes do Mindello e do Porto, ainda pallidos pelo
sangue que seus paes perderam, regando a arvore da liberdade, ninguem
lhes negará, n'esta terra de Portugal, o direito de pedir que lhes
alliviem o jugo d'uma lei d'oppressão e espionagem, que corrompe porque
rebaixa e envilece; uma lei velha de seculos, que aqui se esconde
temendo a luz da nossa era, a luz do progresso; uma lei que viu e tratou
os jesuitas e o poder absoluto; uma lei contemporanea da Inquisição!

Que querem, pois, os Estudantes da Universidade de Coimbra?

Vamos responder a esta ultima pergunta.

Os Estudantes querem a reforma de um processo inquisitorial; garantias
de justiça; que se seja julgado e condemnado como homem, como cidadão
d'um estado livre, e não como relapso fugido aos carceres do
Santo-officio; que a igualdade perante a lei seja uma realidade aqui, e
não risivel fantasmagoria; que nos julguem homens desapaixonados, e não
os que mais estão no declive escorregadio das vinganças; que se distinga
entre _sciencia_ e _costumes_, e acabe por uma vez essa pena infamante
que, com um traço negro de tinta, mata a reputação, o futuro de uma vida
em começo, quando, muita vez tambem, não mata o coração de uma familia.

Que querem os Estudantes da Universidade?

Que se indague tudo da sciencia, que é patrimonio de todos, e nada da
vida particular, que é asylo individual e inviolavel; que por detraz da
cadeira do insino se não lobrigue o olho do esbirro; que se faça
progredir a sciencia, e se deixe a moral desinvolver-se por si.

Que querem os Estudantes da Universidade?

Justiça! Um olhar de pae d'esse Portugal, velho que por todos os lados
se remoça, e só teima em esquecer no frio esmirrador da meia-idade...
quem? os melhores de seus filhos!

Justiça! Um raio de sol tambem para nós, d'esse sol de liberdade e
progresso que luz para todo o seculo, e só a nós nos deixa nas trevas do
passado. Um logar no banquete das garantias-liberaes, que nos é devido,
porque essa liberdade custou o sangue de nossos paes, o nosso sangue!
Garantias para quem quer ser livre, digno e justo; auxilio a estes
escravos que querem, um dia, ser homens e cidadãos.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Manifesto dos Estudantes da
Universidade de Coimbra á opinião illustrada do paiz, by Antero de Quental

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MANIFESTO DOS ESTUDANTES ***

***** This file should be named 29996-8.txt or 29996-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/9/9/29996/

Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
