The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bom senso e bom gosto, folhetim a proposito
da carta que o sr. Anthero do Quental dirigiu ao sr. A. F. de Castilho, by Manuel Pinheiro Chagas

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Bom senso e bom gosto, folhetim a proposito da carta que o sr. Anthero do Quental dirigiu ao sr. A. F. de Castilho

Author: Manuel Pinheiro Chagas

Release Date: September 23, 2009 [EBook #30069]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-15

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOM SENSO E BOM GOSTO--CHAGAS ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano





                          BOM-SENSO E BOM-GOSTO

                                 FOLHETIM

                           A PROPOSITO DA CARTA

                               QUE O SENHOR

                            ANTHERO DO QUENTAL

                            DIRIGIU AO SENHOR

                       ANTONIO FELICIANO DE CASTILHO

                          POR M. PINHEIRO CHAGAS




LISBOA
IMPRENSA DE J. G. DE SOUSA NEVES
17--Rua do Caldeira--17

1865



BOM-SENSO E BOM-GOSTO

FOLHETIM

A PROPOSITO DA CARTA

QUE O SENHOR

ANTHERO DO QUENTAL

DIRIGIU AO SENHOR

ANTONIO FELICIANO DE CASTILHO

POR M. PINHEIRO CHAGAS




LISBOA
IMPRENSA DE J. G. DE SOUSA NEVES
17--Rua do Caldeira--17

1865




    _A carta do sr. Anthero do Quental ao sr. Castilho--Motivo por que tomo
    a palavra--O sr. Anthero apanhado em «negligé»--Vem a proposito o
    baixo-profundo Marinozzi, o Banco Ultramarino, D. Ignez de Castro e
    Camões--As novidades velhas--As porcelanas da Russia--Cita-se Nicoláo
    Tolentino--Entra-se na questão do ideal--Evocação perigosa--As escolas
    da decadencia--Não falta Victor Hugo--Para que servem as imagens--O
    manto de Hercules--As aguias e as galinhas._


Publicou-se ha tempo e tem-se espalhado em Lisboa uma carta dirigida
pelo sr. Anthero do Quental ao sr. Antonio Feliciano de Castilho, carta
em que o poeta das _Odes modernas_ protesta violenta e virulentamente
contra a censura, irrogada pelo cantor do _Amor e Melancholia_ á
desastrada escola, de que o sr. Anthero do Quental teve a triste honra
de ser um dos fundadores. Fôra lavrada essa censura no artigo de critica
litteraria com que o sr. Castilho acompanhou o pobre poema, que ahi
publiquei, e que ficou d'essa fórma illustre. Marengo e Austertilz, diz
Victor Hugo no prologo das _Orientaes_, eram duas ignoradas aldeias;
immortalisou-as um dos lampejos victoriosos da espada de Napoleão.

Não intento responder á carta; ainda que a pessoa, a quem ella é
dirigida, esteja dispensada de responder pela inconveniencia do ataque,
não me compete a mim substituil-a. Penna mais competente e mais
authorisada por todos os motivos se está preparando para isso;[1]
mas eu, que fui um dos primeiros a accusar de falso, de
affectado, de absurdo, de gongorico o estylo da escola de Coimbra, hoje,
que uma das pythonizas desce da tripode, e vem, em linguagem accessivel
aos mortaes, explicar os oraculos, e lançar a luva aos que zombaram dos
livros sybillinos, não desamparo o meu posto, e apresso-me a descer á
liça, onde encontro afinal um adversario. Não via até agora senão
sombras impalpaveis, que fluctuavam nas brumas das abstracções, e se
revestiam de um certo _ideal_, alugado a tanto por ode nos algibebes da
Allemanha.

Linguagem accessivel aos mortaes, disse eu já, e repito agora. «Uma
das maiores provas do absurdo d'aquelle estylo, dizia-me um dia d'estes
Bulhão Pato illuminando a questão com um dos admiraveis lampejos do seu
espirito de poeta, é que até para o defenderem precisam de o
abandonarem.» Mais ainda, digo eu; a prova de que esse estylo é
affectado é que o sr. Anthero do Quental, quando o seu espirito,
excitado pela critica justa ou injusta, que lhe foi feita, se levantou
de um impeto para defender-se, quando a palavra lhe brotou
espontaneamente dos labios, não procurou phraseado nebuloso, não adoptou
fórmas arrevezadas, deixou-a irromper envenenada mas vehemente, resvalar
pelo declive natural, reflectir na torrente espumosa o esplendor do sol
claro e limpido, o desanuviado azul do nosso firmamento. Apanhámol-o em
flagrante delicto de naturalidade. Surprehendemol-o antes de ir para o
toucador, sem peruca, sem carmim, sem pó de arroz. É verdade que o vimos
tambem em mangas de camisa, e de mangas arregaçadas. Mas antes isso, sr.
Anthero do Quental, antes isso do que vestir aquella casaca allemã, tão
safadinha já, e que nos quer dar por nova. _Innovar_, _inventar_, sr.
Anthero do Quental! no tempo de Henrique Heine já essa casaca estava no
fio, e ainda encontrou em Coimbra quem a arremendasse! Ah! Coimbra,
_terra de encanto, do Mondego amena flor_ o que te falta são alfaiates,
que não tenham só obra feita, vinda pelo paquete de Bordeos.

A carta, abstrahindo da verrina indigna do sr. Anthero do Quental,
revela um verdadeiro talento, infelizmente para o seu author. A unica
desculpa, que tem quem põe cabelleira, é ser calvo. Agora póde o
sr. Anthero do Quental voltar quando quizer ao seu tom de oraculo, póde
trepar de novo aos pincaros inaccessiveis do seu estylo, vestir-se,
compor-se, arrebicar-se, pôr a mascara de lata com que suppõe engrossar
a voz, como os actores gregos a robusteciam com a mascara de bronze,
esbravejar na tripode, imitar a aguia de Guernesey como o corvo da
fabula, que tambem intentou seguir o exemplo da rainha dos ares e que se
emmaranhou na lã de um carneiro, exactamente como o sr. Anthero do
Quental se emmaranha nas suas lanzudas theorias; improvisar uma Pathmos
da _Ponte no O_, ser o vidente do botequim do Throno, escrever um
Apocalipse que se venda por 400 rs. nas lojas do costume, perceber o sr.
Theophilo Braga e consentir que elle o perceba, chamar ode ao que nem é
charada porque não tem conceito; mas não estranhe, quando estiver todo
ufano com o grande uniforme de sybilla, que lhe puxem pelo rabicho e que
lhe digam: «Larga a cabelleira.»

Não vou responder á carta, repito, vou apenas levantar as phrases,
que foram dirigidas a todos quantos escrevemos n'esta profana Lisboa,
para nosso ensino e aproveitamento. Oiçamos com o devido respeito.

Trata-se primeiro de saber qual é o motivo da crua guerra intentada por
nós contra a escola de Coimbra, guerra, em que ousámos, sem sermos
Titães, escalar o Olympo, o que nos ha de render o ficarmos ahi
soterrados debaixo de um Etna de palavriado. O motivo nada tem de
litterario, é simplesmente o despeito que nos causa a independencia de
caracter dos escriptores da universidade, que não vem enfileirar-se nas
nossas phalanges, nem jurar fidelidade aos nossos generaes, e a
indignação que a estes inspira o verem aquelles refractarios vagueando
independentes nos plainos do Mondego.

Esteve aqui em Lisboa um baixo-profundo Marinozzi, que, tendo sido
applaudido no Porto, foi pateado em S. Carlos. Nunca o digno homem se
pôde convencer de que essa pateada fosse dada sem segunda intenção, e
que a originasse simplesmente ou o seu mau methodo ou a sua má voz. «Fui
pagar em Lisboa, dizia elle voltando lacrymoso para a cidade invicta, a
questão da dissidencia do banco ultramarino, a iniciativa tomada pelo
Porto na idéa da exposição, e outras coisas que excitam os ciumes da
capital.» O sr. Anthero tambem opina pelo banco ultramarino e pela
iniciativa da exposição. Não o perturbemos n'essa illusão suave. Menos
barbaro que Affonso IV com D. Ignez de Castro, deixemol-o passeiar
_pelos saudosos campos do Mondego_.

    N'aquelle engano d'alma ledo e cego!

Mas, meu caro sr. Marinozzi, seja menos injusto. Suspeita que essas
ovelhas tresmalhadas produzam tamanha desordem no aprisco lisbonense?
Julga que os pastores se ralam com a falta de rezes, que foram atacadas
pela epizootia, que grassa para esses sitios? Essa razão, que o sr.
Anthero allega, não direi que seja uma razão de cabo d'esquadra, mas,
como tanto se affeiçoou aos allemães, não se offenderá que eu lhe diga
que é... _une raison d'allemand_.

Qual é o outro merecimento, por causa de qual são lapidados estes
prophetas? É porque elles não imitam, mas _innovam_ e _inventam_.

Innovam o que? Inventam o que? A philosophia de Hegel? os systemas
historicos de Vico? a symbolica pagã de Creuzer? o esclarecimento da
historia pelo estudo da jurisprudencia de Savigny? a critica de
Schlegel, do Raynouard, de Villemain, de Michelet, de Quinet, de Taine?
Mas tudo isso já lá fóra desceu das mysteriosas alturas do saber de
poucos para a erudição comesinha dos Diccionarios de Conversação.
Applicaram pelo menos ao estudo das coisas patrias os novos pharoes
accendidos pelos sabios estrangeiros, pharoes que projectam a sua
immensa luz nos mares tenebrosos do passado? Não, nem isso, a menos que
os artigos do sr. Theophilo Braga, que não dão um passo para além dos
prologos de Garrett, não sejam considerados como equivalentes aos
trabalhos dos eruditos francezes e allemães! E porque não ha de ser assim?

    Eia ardor, coração, vaidade ao menos!

Ávante! Innovem, sem pagarem direitos d'alfandega. Os manufactores
russos fabricam jarras de porcelana, pondo nas de Sévres um fundo, que
occulta a marca franceza... Cautella, não lhes tirem o fundo, senhores
innovadores e inventores! Escrevam livros, artigos

    Cujos credores _na Allemanha_ fervem

e fulminem com o seu despreso os que vão pelo trilho da vulgaridade.
Venham as innovações requentadas, as invenções em segunda mão, a
originalidade da feira da ladra, o ideal de contrabando! Assim fez a
gralha, em quanto a não depennaram.

Mas o que tem inventado então? A fórma talvez, o estylo, o phraseado;
essa farraparia creio que ninguem lh'a reclama. Essas lentejoulas que
tomam por estrellas, essa missanga que impingem por diamantes, essa
baeta vermelha com que arremedam purpura, tudo isso é seu,
pertence-lhes... Que digo? Nem isso mesmo! nem na parodia foram
originaes; já o latego de Nicolau Tolentino flagellava as costas aos
patriarchas d'essa escola, no fim do seculo passado.

    Aos novos ursos todo o povo acode
    O estylo é sybillino, o nome é ode!

Um grito de consciencia obrigou o sr. Anthero do Quental a confessar o
parentesco, dando ao seu livro o titulo de _Odes modernas_. O estylo é
sybillino ainda, e parece que o nosso grande satyrico tinha as poesias
do sr. Anthero do Quental diante dos olhos, quando escrevia:

    As taes poesias (que a entender não chego)
    Podres palavras teem desenterrado;
    Se levam nó, é tão occulto e cego,
    Que quem quer desatal-o vae logrado.
    Dizem que imitam n'isto um certo Grego,
    Gloria de Thebas, Pindaro chamado,
    Se isto é assim, a sua lingua d'oiro
    Seria grega, mas fallava moiro.

Mas não é esta ainda a pedra de escandalo; não é essa a grande virtude,
que nos obrigou a crucificarmos o sr. Anthero do Quental entre o sr.
Theophilo Braga, e o sr. Vieira de Castro. Que este ultimo já
provavelmente é repellido como traidor, por que o sr. Vieira de Castro
actualmente falla, com eloquencia ou sem eloquencia, não é essa a
questão, mas pelo menos na linguagem terrestre. Esse renegou; mas ao sr.
Theophilo Braga é que naturalmente o Christo coimbrão abre o seio
carinhoso, a esse é que elle diz: _Hodie mecum eris in paradiso_.

A maxima virtude d'essa escola, a que excita as nossas iras, é a sua
adoração pelo ideal, o sacerdocio augusto que esses poetas exercem. Isso
sim, isso é que nós não percebemos, por isso é que os apedrejamos.

O ideal! mas o ideal deriva de idéa, e a idéa é o que eu em vão procuro
por baixo da tumida crosta das suas poesias. Vejo o sr. Anthero do
Quental ora abolir Deus, ora proclamar a obediencia dos astros á lei do
infinito. Mas o que é o infinito? É a materia? Materia e infinito são
duas palavras que andam aos pontapés uma á outra, como as rimas do sr.
Anthero. Mas, admittindo a conciliação do inconciliavel, se é
materialista, o que faz o distincto poeta ao ideal, que adora? É por fim
de contas um ideal de convenção, bom para produzir effeito, mas em que o
poeta não crê? Esse novo idolo teve a sorte de todos os idolos, e são os
seus sacerdotes os primeiros que zombam d'elle, zombando do crédulo
publico?

Ah! não profane esse nome sagrado, não beba nos vasos santos o vinho dos
seus desvairamentos! E sobretudo não profira os grandes nomes de Dante e
de Shakespeare, pallido Saul tremente perante as sombras que evoca! E se
persistir n'isso, se quizer por força que desçam do altar dos seculos o
velho florentino e o tragico britanno, acautele-se porque o bando pueril
de que é chefe e que entrou sorrateiramente no templo do ideal por
descuido dos sachristães, póde ser escorraçado e disperso, não pelo
chicote, que serviu a Jesus para expulsar os mercadores, mas pela
férula, que castiga as travessuras das creanças, que vão brincar com
coisas de que nada entendem.

Dante era um barbaro, e Shakespeare tambem, diz o sr. Anthero do
Quental, reclamando a confraternidade da barbaria. Engana-se; o sr.
Anthero não é um barbaro, é um grego do Baixo Imperio. A sua escola é a
turba de vermes, que brota da putrefacção de uma litteratura. É para os
grandes homens do romantismo o que foi Claudiano para Virgilio, Marini
para Tasso, Campistron para Corneille. A apparição da sua escola é um
facto mil vezes repetido na historia litteraria, e a que
inevitavelmente se segue uma reacção salutar. Cumpram a sua missão;
mas, ao resvalarem no precipicio, não se aferrem a essas arvores
gigantes, que resumem em si uma litteratura inteira. Parasitas do ideal,
não se enrosquem nos robles; mosquitos do coche litterario, não queiram
ser como a sua collega da fabula, que zunia em torno dos corseis que
puxavam o vehiculo, e andava n'uma azafama constante, esfalfada e ufana,
persuadindo-se a si, e querendo persuadir os outros de que era ella e
ella só quem arrastava o carro.

Tambem Victor Hugo foi chamado a proteger as locubrações do sr. Anthero
e as suas _estolas do infinito_. Se julgam encontrar nos livros de
Victor Hugo authorisação para o emprego d'essas imagens absurdas,
mostram mais uma vez que nem entendem os modêlos que tomam. As imagens
do poeta exilado, por mais arrojadas que sejam, despertam sempre uma
idéa no espirito dos leitores. A imagem (deixem-me fallar a sua lingua,
e citar até, se me não engano, o sr. Theophilo Braga), é a expressão
visivel do Sentimento. A imagem dá um corpo á idéa, e faz com que a
vejam os olhos da phantasia. Quando Victor Hugo, n'uma synthese audaz,
nos diz que a ave leva o infinito preso na ponta d'aza, vemos de relance
a cadeia immensa dos seres, cujos fusis extremos se ligam; que idéa nos
desperta a _estola do infinito_? quando encontrou o sr. Anthero do
Quental, em Victor Hugo, uma imagem tão ôca de sentido como esta! E, se
alguma vez a encontrou, foi de certo nos instantes em que a
imperfectibilidade humana venceu a inspiração divina, foi nos momentos
em que dormia Homero, e é uma covardia, sr. Anthero do Quental,
aproveitar-se do somno do gigante, para lhe ir estampar na fronte o
indelevel estygma da sua imitação.

Mas o gigante desperta; levanta-se o Hercules, e, ao sacudir o manto,
deixa cair os pygmeus, que lá se esconderam, na lama d'onde brotaram.
_As aguias não saem das capoeiras_, disse, com muita razão o sr.
Anthero; mas tambem não basta não sair de uma capoeira para ser aguia.
As gallinhas tresmalhadas, que se mettem nos ninhos dos alcantís, podem
julgar-se similhantes ás aves de Jupiter; mas quando se trata de voar,
sobem as aguias para o ceu, desabam as gallinhas... no quintal.
Cacarejem embora vituperios; os genios, a quem insultam, e aquelles a
quem imitam (insulto ainda maior), pairam enlaçados no firmamento, e os
zoilos nem terão a triste gloria de ser amarrados por elles ao
pelourinho da sua immortalidade.

    [1] Referia-me ao sr. Julio de Castilho, cuja carta já foi publicada.




VENDE-SE

Em LISBOA--Livraria de A. M. Pereira, rua Augusta n.^os 50, 52, e nas
mais do costume.

PORTO--Livraria da Viuva Moré, e na do sr. Cruz Coutinho.

COIMBRA--Livraria da Viuva Moré.

PREÇO 100 RÉIS


Tambem se acham nas mesmas lojas:

Resposta á carta que o senhor Anthero do Quental dirigiu ao senhor
Antonio Feliciano de Castilho, por Manoel Roussado--100 réis.

O senhor Antonio Feliciano de Castilho e o senhor Anthero do Quental,
por Julio de Castilho--160 réis.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Bom senso e bom gosto, folhetim a
proposito da carta que o sr. Anthero do Quental dirigiu ao sr. A. F. de Castilho, by Manuel Pinheiro Chagas

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOM SENSO E BOM GOSTO--CHAGAS ***

***** This file should be named 30069-8.txt or 30069-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/0/6/30069/

Produced by Pedro Saborano

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
