The Project Gutenberg EBook of Descripçaõ sobre a cultura do Canamo ou
Canave, by Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Descripçaõ sobre a cultura do Canamo ou Canave

Author: Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau

Translator: José Mariano da Conceição Veloso

Release Date: September 23, 2009 [EBook #30068]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-15

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DESCRIPCAO DO CANAMO OU CANAVE ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano





             DESCRIPÇAÕ SOBRE A CULTURA DO CANAMO, OU CANAVE.

         _Sua colheita, maceraçaõ n'agua, até se pôr no estado
                 para ser gramado, ripado, assedado._

                   TRADUZIDA, E IMPRESSA POR ORDEM

                          DE SUA MAGESTADE.




                                LISBOA,

              Na Offic. de JOAÕ PROCOPIO CORREA DA SILVA,
                Impressor da Santa Igreja Patriarcal.
                         ANNO M. DCC. XCVIII.




DESCRIPÇAÕ SOBRE A CULTURA DO CANAMO, OU CANAVE.




§ I.

_Qual he o temperamento do ar, que convem milhor ao Canamo._


O Canamo naõ cresce tambem nos paizes quentes, como nos climas
temperados, e se cria muito melhor nos Paizes frigidissimos, como o
Canada, Riga, &c.: os quaes produzem abundancia de Linho, que he o
melhor. Se emprega todos os annos huma grande quantidade do Canamo de
Riga, em França, em Inglaterra, e principalmente em Hollanda.




§ II.

_Qual he a terra, mais propria para o Canamo._


He preciso para o Canamo huma terra branda, facil de lavrar, e hum pouco
ligeira: porém fertil, e bem estercada. Os terrenos seccos naõ saõ
proprios para semear o Canamo: porque naõ cresce muito nelles: antes
pelo contrario he sempre baixo, e o linho, que produz, he ordinariamente
lenhoso, o que o faz duro, e elastico: todos estes defeitos saõ
consideraveis, principalmente para fazer as maiores cordagens, como
veremos adiante.

Com tudo nos annos chuvosos he melhor semeallo nos terrenos seccos, do
que nos terrenos humidos: porém estes annos saõ raros, assim se deve
semear ordinariamente á borda d'hum regato, ou d'algum souto, cheio
d'agua, de sorte, que a agua esteja muito perto, sem que produza
innundaçaõ; estas terras saõ muito procuradas.




§ III.

_Dos Estrumes proprios para temperar a terra dos Linhos._


Todos os adubos, que fazem a terra leve saõ proprios para a producçaõ do
Canamo: por conseguinte, o estrume de cavallo, d'ovelha, de pombo, o
lodo das capoeiras se devem preferir ao estrume de boi, e de vacca, e
naõ sei se por acaso se deve usar também, para estrumar os Linhaes de
barro, chamado marne.

He preciso estrumar todos os annos os linhaes, antes da lavoura do
Inverno, para que o estrume tenha tempo de se consumir, durante esta
estaçaõ, e para que se misture mais intimamente com a terra, quando se
fazem as lavouras da Primavera.

O estrume dos pombos he o unico, que se espalha nas ultimas lavouras,
para se tirar delle melhor proveito: com tudo quando a Primavera he
secca, se deve temer, que o estrume venha a queimar a semente, o que naõ
succederá, se se espalhar no Inverno; porém neste caso he melhor deitar
mais estrume, porque, fazendo o contrario, resultaria menos proveito.




§ IV.

_Das Lavouras, que se devem dar aos Linhaes._


A Primeira, e a mais consideravel destas Lavouras, se deve dar nos mezes
de Dezembro, e Janeiro: ha Pessoas, que costumaõ fazella com a charrua,
lavrando a terra por traços, ou regos, outros a costumaõ fazer com a
enchada, formando com ella regos, para que as geadas do Inverno amoleçaõ
melhor a terra; ha tambem outros, que a fazem com a pá de ferro, com a
qual se fazem os valados; este modo he sem contradicçaõ melhor, que os
outros; porém he mais dilatado, e mais trabalhoso; pelo contrario a
Lavoura da charrua he a mais expedita; porém menos proveitosa.

Na primeira se deve preparar a terra para effeito de receber a semente,
lavrando-a duas, ou tres vezes, de quinze em quinze dias, ou de tres em
tres semanas, e depois disto, se deve alizar o terreno.

Deve-se observar, que estas Lavouras se devem, ou se podem fazer como
aquella, que se faz no Inverno com a charrua, enchada, ou com a
sobredita pá.

Finalmente, quando estas Lavouras saõ feitas, e que ficaõ alguns
torrões, se devem pilar com huns malhos; porque he preciso, que todo o
terreno do Linhal esteja taõ unido, e taõ movel, como o canteiro d'hum
Jardim.




§ V.

_Do tempo, e da maneira de semear a Linhaça._


Costuma-se semear a Linhaça no mez de Abril, alguns a semeaõ quinze dias
mais cedo, que os outros, e todos correm differentes perigos; porque
aquelles, que a semeaõ muito cedo, devem summamente temer as geadas da
Primavera, que causaõ grande prejuizo ao Canamo, novamente nascido; e
aquelles que semeaõ muito tarde, devem temer as seccuras, que impedem
algumas vezes o nascimento do Canamo.

A Linhaça se deve semear espessa, porque, sendo semeada ralla, viria a
ser o Canamo muito grosso, a casca muito lenhosa, e a fibra muito dura,
o que he hum grande defeito; com tudo quando a linhaça se semea muito
espessa, ficaõ muitos pés pequenos, e abaffados pelos outros, o que he
tambem hum inconveniente; he preciso pois observar hum meio, e
ordinariamente os Linhaes naõ saõ rallos, senaõ quando perece huma parte
da linhaça por causa das geadas, da seccura, ou quaesquer outros
accidentes.

Assim se deve observar, que a linhaça he huma semente oleosa; porque
estas sortes de sementes, se fazem rançosas com o tempo, e entaõ naõ
nascem; por conseguinte he preciso fazer de sórte, que senaõ semeie
mais, que a linhaça da ultima colheita; porque quando se semeia aquella,
que tem dous annos, muitos grãos naõ nascem, e se for mais velha,
nascerá muito menos.

Logo que se semeia a linhaça, he preciso enterralla, esta operaçao se
faz com huma grade, se a terra foi lavrada com a charrua, ou com hum
ansinho, se foi lavrada com a enchada, ou pá.

Além desta precauçaõ he preciso guardar com cuidado o Linhal, até
que a linhaça esteja inteiramente nascida: por causa da quantidade
de passaros, e principalmente de pombos, que o destroem
extraordinariamente. He verdade, que os pombos naõ esgravataõ, nem
outros muitos passaros, e naõ fazem damno aos grãos de trigo, que se
achaõ cubertos de terra; porém damnificaõ muito a linhaça, ainda que
esteja bem cuberta; porque a differença, que ha entre estas duas
sementes, he que os grãos de trigo naõ sahem da terra juntamente com a
herva, que produzem; porém a linhaça sahe inteiramente com a pequena
planta, que produz, e he neste tempo, que os pombos, e outros passaros
lhe causaõ grande damno: porque, em comendo o graõ da linhaça, arrancaõ
a planta, e a destroem absolutamente.

Os camponezes costumaõ fazer fugir os passaros com espantalhos, e fazem
guardar os Linhaes por seus filhos. Estas precauções naõ saõ
sufficientes, quando os Linhaes saõ muito grandes, e que os pombos estaõ
famintos; porque tenho visto pessoas muito robustas, e ligeiras, e
tambem alguns cães desamparar o Linhal, por estarem excessivamente
cançados: porém este trabalho naõ dura muito tempo; porque quando tem
lançado muitas folhas, naõ he preciso guardar os Linhaes.




§ VI.

_Do cuidado, que se deve ter com o Linhal até a sua colheita._


Os Linhaes, que custaõ muito trabalho até ao nascimento da linhaça, naõ
daõ trabalho algum, até ao tempo da colheita, assim he preciso entreter
sómente os fossos, e impedir que os animaes os naõ damnifiquem.

Com tudo quando as seccuras saõ grandes, ha camponezes, que costumaõ
regar os seus Linhaes, porém he preciso, que sejaõ pequenos, e que a
agua esteja perto, excepto que se possaõ regar por immersaõ, como se
pratica em alguns lugares.

Temos dito, que aconteciaõ algumas vezes accidentes á linhaça, que
faziaõ o Linhal rallo, e temos tambem observado, que entaõ o Canamo era
grosso, ramalhudo, e incapaz de produzir boa fibra; neste caso he
preciso sachallo para tirar maior fructo do Linhal, e para impedir, que
as más hervas suffoquem o Canamo.




§ VII.

_Colheita do Canamo macho._


No principio de Agosto os pés do Canamo, que naõ tem semente, aos quaes
o vulgo chama Canamo femea, e que nós chamamos macho, principiaõ a
fazer-se amarellos na parte superior, e brancos na inferior, o que he
hum signal evidente d'estarem capazes de se arrancarem; entaõ as
mulheres entraõ no Linhal, e arrancaõ todos os pés machos: dos quaes
fazem feixinhos, que põem por ordem no chaõ, tendo grande cuidado de naõ
damnificar o Canamo femea; porque deve ficar na terra algum tempo mais,
para acabar de amadurecer a sua semente.

Depois de ter arrancado o Canamo macho, se fórma delle feixesinhos;
deve-se tomar cuidado, que as plantas, que os fórmaõ, sejaõ de hum igual
comprimento pouco mais, ou menos, e que todas as raizes sejaõ iguaes,
finalmente cada feixesinho se deve atar com hum raminho de Canamo.

Depois disto se deve expor ao Sol para fazer seccar as folhas, e as
flores: quando saõ seccas se fazem cahir, batendo cada feixinho contra o
tronco de huma arvore, ou contra huma parede, e se ajuntaõ varios destes
feixesinhos, para formar delles outros maiores, e transportallos para o
lugar, aonde se devem deitar de molho.




§ VIII.

_Como se deve curtir, ou deitar de molho o Canamo._


O Lugar, aonde se costuma curtir o linho Canamo, he hum fosso, que deve
ter dezoito, ou vinte e quatro pés de comprimento, doze, ou dezoito de
largura, e tres, ou quatro de profundidade, o qual se deve encher de
agua, que se transporta para o dito lugar de alguma fonte proxima, e se
houver occasiaõ, seria melhor introduzir no dito fosso por meio de algum
aqueducto, para evitar algum trabalho, quando o fosso está cheio, se
deve deixar hum lugar livre, para que a superficie da dita agua se possa
vasar.

Ha varias pessoas, que, desprezando este modo de curtir o Canamo, fazem
sómente hum simples fosso á borda de hum rio: ha outras, que o molhaõ,
mettendo-o no mesmo rio: finalmente quando as fontes, e os rios estaõ
muito longe, o costumaõ curtir nos fóssos cheios de agua; ou nas lagoas.

Quando se quer curtir o Canamo, se põem em ordem no fundo d'agua,
cobrindo-o com huma pouca de palha, sobre a qual se põem alguns pedaços
de páo, ou de pedra para segurar o Canamo.

O Canamo se deve deixar neste estado até que a casca, que produz a fibra
se despegue facilmente do tallo, que se acha no meio da planta, a qual
se deve visitar de tempo em tempo, para ver se a dita casca se despega
com facilidade do dito tallo, e quando se despegar facilmente, se deve
tirar do fosso, donde se acha.

A operaçaõ, de que fallamos, naõ somente serve para fazer cahir a casca
do Canamo, mas tambem para atenrar, e afinar a fibra; para melhor
comprehender como a agua produz este effeito, he preciso ter huma idéa
da disposicaõ organica de huma aste do dito Canamo: assim a vou dar o
mais breve, que for possivel.

As astes do Canamo saõ ocas inteiramente, e cheias de huma tenra
medulla: sobre esta medulla ha hum páo tenro, e quebradiço, que se chama
tallo, ou cana, sobre o qual se acha huma casca bastantemente delgada,
composta de fibras, que se estendem ao comprimento da aste: esta casca
está bastantemente pegada á dita cana, e as fibras longitudinaes, de que
a dita casca he composta se ajuntaõ humas, e outras por meio d'hum
tecido vessicular, ou celular; finalmente tudo isto se acha coberto
d'huma finissima membrana, que se póde chamar epiderme.

O metter o Canamo na agua naõ he para outra cousa mais, senaõ para que a
casca se despegue da cana mais facilmente, para destruir a epiderme, e
huma parte do tecido celular, que ligaõ juntamente as fibras
longitudinaes. Tudo isto se produz por hum principio de podridaõ; por
cuja causa senaõ deve ter muito tempo na agua; porque entaõ naõ somente
a epiderme se corromperia, mas tambem prejudicaria as fibras
longitudinaes, e naõ teria força alguma: pelo contrario quando o Canamo
naõ fica na agua o tempo necessario, a casca está pegada ao tallo, e a
fibra fica dura, e elastica, sem se poder nunca afinar perfeitamente,
assim se deve observar hum meio, que consiste naõ sómente no tempo, que
deve estar de molho, mas tambem

I. Na qualidade d'agua; porque he melhor curtir o Canamo n'agua
encharcada, e turva, que naquella, que corre, e que he clara.

II. No calor do ar; porque he mais util curtillo, quando faz calma, do
que quando faz frio.

III. Na qualidade do Canamo: porque aquelle, que se cria em huma terra
branda, e humida, e que se colhe algum tanto verde, se curte mais
depressa, que aquelle que se cria em huma terra forte, e secca, e que se
deixa amadurecer muito.

Finalmente, quando o Canamo está pouco tempo n'agua para se curtir, a
fua fibra he melhor; por cuja causa senaõ deve curtir senaõ no tempo
quente, e quando os Outonos saõ frios, ha pessoas, que guardaõ o Canamo
femea para a Primavera seguinte, para entaõ se curtir: ha alguns, que
julgaõ ser melhor curtillo n'agua encharcada, e mórta, do que n'agua
viva.

Mandei curtir o Canamo em differentes aguas, e achei mais suave aquelle,
que tinha sido curtido n'agua encharcada, do que aquelle, que foi n'agua
corrente: porém a fibra, que se tira do Canamo, curtido n'agua
encharcada, adquire huma cor desagradavel, que lhe naõ causa
verdadeiramente prejuiso algum; porque se faz branca com facilidade;
porém esta cor desagrada, e faz-lhe perder a venda, assim se deve fazer
passar pelo meio do lugar aonde o Canamo se curtio, huma pequena
corrente d'agua para renovar aquella, que anticipadamente se deitou no
fosso, e para prevenir, que senaõ corrompa: cheguei a curtir o Canamo
estendendo-o sobre hum prado, como fazem as lavadeiras, quando querem
córar a roupa; porém este modo de curtir he muito custoso, e além disso
a fibra tem pouca differença daquella, que se curtio segundo o methodo.

Fiz tambem a experiencia de mandar ferver o Canamo n'agua com a
esperança de o curtir em pouco tempo; porém tendo fervido mais de dez
horas, o tirei d'agua, e fazendo-o seccar, achei, que se naõ podia
tascar. He verdade, que mandando-o eu tascar, estando ainda molhado, e
quente, a casca se despegava facilmente: porém ficava, como huma fita, e
naõ se tendo destruido o tecido celular, as fibras longitudinaes ficavaõ
juntas humas com outras, de sorte que naõ se podendo separar era
impossivel affinar bem a fibra; pelo referido se mostra evidentemente,
que senaõ póde terminar o tempo, que o Canamo ha de ficar n'agua, porque
a qualidade do Canamo, d'agua, e temperamento do ar affroixaõ, ou
precipitaõ esta operaçaõ. Alguns julgaõ, que o Canamo está bastantemente
curtido, quando a casca se despega facilmente da cana, e isto ajuda
muito aos Lavradores, que cultivaõ esta planta, a naõ lhe darem, senaõ o
gráo de curtidura, que he preciso; com tudo se enganaõ algumas vezes, e
me parece, que ha Provincias, aonde se costuma curtir mais tempo, do que
em outras. Naõ posso deixar d'advertir, que deve haver muita cautella em
naõ curtir o Canamo em certas aguas, aonde se achaõ alguns pequenos
bichos, chamados lagostins, porque roem o Canamo, e a fibra fica quasi
perdida.




§ IX.

_Da colheita do Canamo Femea._


Quando tratámos do Canamo macho, dissemos, que se devia deixar ainda
algum tempo na terra o Canamo femea, para que a sua semente acabasse
d'amadurecer: porém esta dilaçaõ faz amadurecer muito o Canamo femea, e
faz tambem, que a sua casca, venha a ser muito lenhosa, donde se segue
que o linho, que se tira da dita planta; he mais grosseiro, e mais
tosco, que aquelle, que se tira do Canamo macho; assim quando se vir,
que a semente está bem formada, se deve arrancar o Canamo femea do mesmo
modo, que se arranca o macho, do qual se devem formar feixesinhos, e
polos na mesma ordem, que dissemos acima.

Em alguns Paizes se costuma acabar de amadurecer a linhaça, mettendo o
Canamo femea em algumas covas redondas da profundidade d'hum pé, e de
tres, até quatro de diametro, e pondo no fundo destas covas os
feixesinhos de Canamo bem unidos huns com os outros de modo, que a
linhaça fique para baixo, e a raiz da planta para cima, e atando os
feixesinhos do Canamo com ligaduras de palha, para ficarem bem juntos, e
lhe lançaõ ao redor toda a terra, que se tinha tirado das covas, para
que as cabeças do Canamo fiquem bem abaffadas.

As cabeças do Canamo se aquecem com o auxilio da humidade, que se contém
na dita cova; do mesmo modo que se aquece hum montaõ de feno verde, ou
hum montaõ d'esterco: este calor acaba d'amadurecer a linhaça, e a
dispoem para sahir da sua casca mais facilmente.

Quando a linhaça está madura, o Canamo se tira fóra da cova, porque
criaria bolor, se o deixarem mais tempo na cova, do que he necessario.

Em alguns Paizes, aonde ha muito Canamo, o naõ costumaõ enterrar do
modo, que acabo de dizer; porém costumaõ pôr os feixesinhos em tal
ordem, que ficaõ cabeça com cabeça, e alguns dias depois tiraõ a linhaça
do modo, que vou dizer.




§ X.

_Da Colheita da Linhaça._


Aquelles que tem pouco Canamo, costumaõ estender hum panno no chaõ para
receber nelle a sua semente, outros alimpaõ, e preparaõ hum lugar bem
unido, no qual estendem o Canamo, pondo as cabeças d'hum mesmo lado, e
depois disto as batem ligeiramente, com hum páo, ou com hum mangoal:
esta operaçao faz cahir a linhaça, a qual costumaõ pôla de parte, para
semear na Primavera seguinte, porém como fica ainda muita linhaça nas
cabeças do Canamo, esta se tira, penteando as ditas cabeças com os
dentes d'hum instrumento, chamado ripador, e por meio desta operaçaõ se
faz cahir ao mesmo tempo as folhas com a linhaça, tudo misturado
juntamente: costuma-se guardar tudo isto em hum montaõ alguns dias, e
depois se estende ao Sol para se seccar: finalmente tudo aquillo se bate
depois de secco, e se alimpa a linhaça, joeirando-a, ou passando-a por
hum crivo: esta segunda semente serve para fazer óleo de linhaça, e para
nutrir as aves domesticas. Finalmente se costuma levar o Canamo ao
lugar, onde se curte, para se preparar do mesmo modo, que o Canamo
macho.




§ XI.

_O que he preciso fazer para tirar o Canamo do lugar, aonde se deitou de
molho._


Quando se tirar o Canamo do fosso, aonde se curtio, se devem desatar os
feixesinhos para effeito de se seccar, estendendo-os ao Sol ao longo de
hum muro, ou em hum lugar, em que naõ haja absolutamente humidade:
deve-se ter muito cuidado de virar os ditos feixes de tempo em tempo, e
quando o Canamo estiver bem secco, se deve pôr outra vez em feixes, e
transportallos para a casa, onde se quer recolher em lugar secco, até
que o queiraõ tascar.

N. B. _Esta Obra he precursora de outra maior, em que se continuará esta
Memoria, que he de M. Duhamel, e se dará tudo o mais que se tem escripto
a este assumpto, até entrar na cordearia._


FIM.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Descripçaõ sobre a cultura do Canamo
ou Canave, by Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DESCRIPCAO DO CANAMO OU CANAVE ***

***** This file should be named 30068-8.txt or 30068-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/0/6/30068/

Produced by Pedro Saborano

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
