The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Pata no Choco, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Pata no Choco

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: March 9, 2010 [EBook #31575]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PATA NO CHOCO ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)






                            A PATA NO CHOCO.

                             SEGUNDA EDIÇAÕ.

                               PORTO, 1827:

                 Na typ. de Viuva Alvarez Ribeiro & Filhos.

                             _--Com licença.--_


Vende-se por 50 reis na mesma Imprensa, e na loja da Fama ás Hortas.




Duas Comadres muito amigas, _Maria Pires_ e _Tereza Fernandes_, que por
nome naõ percaõ, topando-se hum dia no solheiro, travaraõ ateada
palestra ácerca de huma _Pata no chôco_; assumpto este que, parecendo
esteril de sua natureza, ellas souberaõ enriquecêllo com toda a loquéla
de tagarelas perfeitas. Por tal motivo, e tambem por mostrar aos
curiosos leitores as superstições e ridicularias em que se occupaõ
mulheres, aqui vai huma copia fiel daquella pratica extravagante.


_Maria Pires._--Eu, Sr.ª Comadre, ando taõ consumida por causa da minha
Pata, taõ affligida estou, que naõ lhe digo nada!....

_Tereza Fernandes._--Pois que lhe assuccedeo com a sua bixinha, que taõ
boa criadeira era?

_Pires._--Que me havia de assucceder! cousas dos meus peccados, dos meus
grandes peccados, que, sendo sem conta, como na verdade saõ, naõ podem
deixar de me acarretar mofinas a montes!

_Fernandes._--Aposto eu que a rapoza lhe apanhou a sua joia, ou alguma
zabaneira nossa visinha, que será o mais certo, visto naõ haver já temor
da justiça de Deos, nem da d'El-Rei; cada hum abafa o que póde, e quem
mais abafa melhor lhe vai: como tirem boas provas da surripiadela certos
lambões de lingoa grande, logo he tal a mingoa de provas, que naõ ha
huma para huma mézinha; ficando o ladraõ rico, e abençoado como o nosso
Pai Abrahaõ; e quatro figas para os que foraõ tosquiados ou esfolados,
quando Deos quer. Porém descance, minha Comadre, eu lhe responso a Pata;
e tenha muita fé em que ella ha de apparecer, se naõ tiver cahido em
maõs apegadiças, pois ahi pouco poder tem as minhas rezas; nem ellas me
trazem sardinha que o gato leva: mas entaõ iremos fallar com aquelle
corpo aberto, que tudo sabe e tudo adivinha, para ao menos sabermos de
quem nos havemos de queixar, e naõ andarmos ás cegas botando juizos
temerarios.

_Pires._--Naõ vai por ahi o gato ás filhozes: antes isso fôra; pois se
quer estariamos desempeçadas d'outras penas, ainda maiores. Naõ, Snr.ª
minha, a Pata naõ foi furtada; está, sim, no chôco ha hum mar de
dias, sem acabar de tirar os ovos, encarriçada por hum tal feitio, que
naõ bebe nem come cousa que Deos crie; em fim parece Moura encantada:
tantas saõ as negras das minhas culpas! Ora, tomando eu isto por caso
agourento, ando estarrecidinha de todo; porque, segundo a madorna da
Pata e sua longa choquice, arreceio, com muita razaõ, que ella esteja
tirando algum Bicho de Chaves, que nos ponha de máos pezares, e a todos
nos pape vivas e inteiras!

_Fernandes._--Appello eu para Deos! Sino salomaõ nos acuda! Pois ha de
essa excommungada ave gerar similhante bicho! Só se fôr o diabo em
figura de Pata! Sume-te, porco; vai-te para as areias gordas, naõ
atormentes a christandade com os teus desaguizados e malfeitorias!
Quanto a mim, Snr.ª Comadre, esses seus temores saõ puras vanidades;
mas, pelo sim pelo naõ, seria bom desfazer-se da excommungada e mais dos
seus ovos, sem amor algum a taes embelecos; deixallos ir com a trupia;
arrenego da tigelinha d'ouro em que hei de cuspir o sangue.

_Pires._--Tem-me vindo a repiques de fazer o que Vossa Mercê diz; mas
quem sabe se bulir-lhe será peor, e se já debaixo dessa malfadada Pata
estará o bicho sahido, o qual, mexendo-lhe eu, me trafegue logo para as
suas entranhas danadas, sem me deixar dizer esta boca he minha; pois tal
será elle, que já ao romper da casca faça destas trepolías! Na verdade
lhe digo que trago o meu coraçaõ negro como a noite escura: tal o tenha
quem me quizer mal! E tudo isto, aqui para nós, vem-me de hum sonho de
má estreia, que, se fôr verdadeiro, qual por nossos peccados será, temos
ahi a fim do mundo!

_Fernandes._--E que sonho foi esse taõ desestrado?

_Pires._--Ai! naõ he bom assoalhar similhantes cousas! nada queira
saber, naõ aperte comigo, por vida sua lho peço, pois temo conte a
outrem o que eu lhe disser, ou de alguma falla mal considerada, por onde
tudo se venha a descubrir. Olhe, Snr.ª Comadre, por hum cravo se perde
huma ferradura, por huma ferradura hum cavallo, por hum cavallo hum
cavalleiro, por hum cavalleiro huma praça, e por huma praça hum reino;
isto lhe digo eu para ficar entendendo que o descuido de huma palavra
póde pôr o meu sonho nas bocas do mundo, e alevantarem-se daqui muitas
carrapatas, de que o Senhor me defenda!

_Fernandes._--Nisso diria Vossa Mercê bem se eu fosse de geraçaõ
chocalheira; mas cá naõ ha desses achaques, embora o digamos: e ainda
que lá dizem, da má mulher te guarda, e da boa naõ fieis nada, mulher eu
sou capaz de ter maõ nas agoas, como as pintadas em parede. Com que,
minha amiga, desabafe comigo com todo o desafogo, que eu lhe prometto, á
fé de christã, a ninguem abrir boca; só se fôr á nossa amiga Cascalha,
por ser cá do peito: quem me quer bem, diz-me do que sabe e dá-me do
que tem. Mas essa mesma, com ser hum poço de segredos, como nós sabemos,
ha de jurar guardar este _em verbo Saçardotes_; senaõ nada feito.

_Pires._--Sendo assim, naõ terei duvida em lhe contar o caso; porém veja
primeiro o que me promette: antes que cazes, olha o que fazes.

_Fernandes._--Póde fallar, está dito; faça de conta que está aos pés do
seu Padre Confessor.

_Pires._--Pois, Snr.ª minha, sonhei eu que essa amaldiçoada Pata já
tinha tirado os ovos, e que de hum delles sahira huma serpentarrona,
cousa espantosa! ou naõ sei que maldita casta de monstro, pois se
compunha de partes taõ estranhas entre si e desconcertadas, que fazia
dar volta ao miolo; até ali havia unhas de leaõ e esporões de galo!
Entaõ aquillo, fosse o que fosse, tinha tres a quatro cabeças, ou cinco
seriaõ ellas, valha a verdade, que eu com o meu susto poder-me-hia
enganar na conta: o certo he que huma das taes se cobria com huma grande
casca, bem similhante no feitio a huma cousa que eu já tenho visto, mas
poucas vezes, por isso naõ posso dizer o que he; posso, sim, affirmar
ser cousa de monta: o Senhor bem me entende.... Todas as outras cabeças
eraõ de catadura terrivel; porem a daquella faria erguer os cabellos a
hum calvo, atirando-lhe com a peruca até essas estrellas; e bem se via
que era nella aonde o monstraõ diabolico tinha o maior poder da sua
peçonha. Esquecia-me dizer que este demonio, sumido seja elle,
disfarçava as desformidades do serro medonho com huma capa lustroza,
assim a modo de tartaruga, ou de outra concha de além mar, mas nem tudo
que luz he ouro! Ora dos outros ovos sahiraõ varias salamandras nojentas
e lagartos feios, todos taõ arrastados como o credito de Judas traidor.
E ha de Vossa Mercê cuidar que haveria bulha entre a bicharada e o bicho
grande? Pois naõ Snr.ª; todos elles estavaõ muito de mano a mano: taõ
bom he o diabo como sua mãi.

_Fernandes._--Eu estou a tremer com similhantes bicharocos! A benta hora
seja comnosco! Isso naõ deve de ser cousa de Pata!

_Pires._--Sim, Snr.ª, he o que lhe digo; foi a mesma Pata que os pôz a
todos, taõ real e verdadeiramente como andar eu tolhidinha, azangada,
levada das más horas; e mais defumo-me a miudo com alecrim colhido em a
noite de S. Joaõ; como em jejum arruda e alho; e trago ao meu pescoço
maõ esquerda de toupeira, com aza de morcego macho, nascido á meia noite
em ponto de huma terça feira, e apanhado ao sabbado em encruzilhada
ao pino do meio dia; e ainda assim Deos sabe o que por cá vai, esperando
a todos os instantes vêr por obra esse mofino sonho!

_Fernandes._--Ai! que te eu vejo tal, morro em antes de me estrancinhar
essa cousa ruim! Grandes malquerenças e grandes diabruras nos andaõ por
casa: cégo he quem naõ vê por hum crivo! A minha franga, Snr.ª Comadre,
tambem he hum signal dos muitos feitiços que nos perseguem; pois, sendo
ella d'antes, como na verdade era, cristalhuda, azivieira, sacudída, e
em fim hum pino d'ouro, taõ máo olhado lhe deraõ que, mettendo-se-lhe
por entre os voadouros huns taes piolhos endiabrados, nunca mais foi
senhora sua a pobrezinha da bicha, nem mais pôde alevantar a aza.

_Pires._--Cada hum sente o seu, e Deos o de todos. Mas a Pata no chôco,
Snr.ª Comadre, he que tem rabo de cabra; taes diabruras saõ as peores
que podem ser, pois a toda a gente ameaçaõ.

_Fernandes._--Seria acertado fallar Vossa Mercê com alguma feiticeira,
mestra no seu officio, para vêrmos a volta que ella dava a similhantes
feitiçarias: as cousas desfazem-se por onde se fazem.

_Pires._--Ja fui fallar com a Saparra a este mesmo respeito; e
pagando-lhe adiantado, porque mais vale hum toma que dous te darei:
contei-lhe depois tudo, tim tim por tim tim, e ella me disse que o
infernal aborto da Pata saltaria pelo arco da velha, e feria destemperos
que naõ estaõ em livros, se naõ buscassemos logo para guarda nossa hum
caõ negro que tivesse passado as agoas do mar, e tivesse visto muitas
castas de gentes: disse mais que o bom do caõ havia de ser fiel,
animoso, arrojado e botadiço, capaz de se encrespar com leões; e que, se
tal o pudessemos haver, veriamos desapparecer a Pata com a sua ninhada.
Ora, eu já tirei inculcas por esse mundo de Christo, e com effeito
daõ-me noticias de hum caõ bem estreado que parece vir a pêllo para o
intento; he mesmo, mesmo qual se requer; mas naõ me sabem dizer o modo
d'elle nos vir á maõ: e assim estou vendo quando sahe o bicho, e nos
faça em bocados, sem nós termos quem nos acuda.

_Fernandes._--Nem fallar nisso he bom, Snr.ª Comadre! os dentes me
batem, e os cabellos se me arripiaõ! Olhe, sabe que mais? naõ tomemos as
dôres antes do parto; mate-se o diabo, naõ nos matemos nós: se por
ventura depararmos com esse caõ bem fadado, fortuna será nossa; e se
naõ, encommendemo-nos ás almas santas, e esperemos pelo que vier: em
quanto o páo vai e vem, folgaõ as costas.




Com pouco mais ergueraõ maõ as Comadres do assumpto da _Pata no chôco_;
e com a ligeireza propria do sexo, passáraõ a outros entretenitnentos
ainda mais ridiculos; salvo huma adivinhaçaõ, d'entre varias que
disseraõ, pois essa naõ me pareceo de taes cabeças, e por isso ei-la ahí
para desafiar os intelligentes, e affinar as intelligencias.

        _Adivinhaçaõ._

    He minha patria o Brazil,
    De lá vim a Portugal
    Ser pizada e destruida;
    E sendo eu joia Real,
    A sorte cheguei a ter
    De me ver mesmo vendida,
    Como artigo mercantil,

        Para alguem se enriquecer.
        Huns virtude me attribuem,
        Outros me reputaõ vicio,
        E como vicio me excluem;
        Mas destes, a seu pesar,
        Muitos ha que beneficio
        Vem por fim em mim buscar.
        Bastante gente ha tambem

    Que naõ me quer mal nem bem.
    Huma irmã naõ lonje tenho
    Que a este reino he vedada,
    E o tenta com grande empenho;
    Mas por ser mui altanada,
    Ganha pouco neste jogo.
    Coube-nos por nosso mal
    A sorte dura e fatal
    D' ambas soffrermos o fogo.

Alto lá, Snrs. adivinhões; a seu tempo se colhem as peras, dizem as
Comadres: suspendaõ o seu juizo, se elle ha de ser prejuizo; e tenhaõ a
paciencia de esperar que a advinhaçaõ se explique em hum folheto, que
fica para imprimir-se, intitulado==_Grandes Mercês do Genio Tutelar das
Bagatelas._==




Das adivinhações omittidas na primeira ediçaõ desta obra, a que tem mais
geito he a seguinte:

    Fui expedita algum dia
    Em bellos fructos mostrar:
    Aos olhos dei alegria,
    E consegui regalar
    Com largueza muita gente:
    Fui liberal finalmente;
    E, por huma sorte impia,
    Vou-me deixando de o ser.
    Hum mal me veio tolher,
    Pelo qual me desconheço;
    Pois quebrantada me sinto,
    E os corações escureço.
    Dizem que bando faminto.
    De bichos vís me faz isto;
    Que elles, a mim apegados
    Com afêrro nunca visto,
    Quanto podem, porfiados
    Me privaõ de fazer bem.
    Mas o que he certo, e ninguem
    De modo algum negar ousa,
    He o estar eu demudada,
    E infelizmente azangada
    Por huma terrivel cousa,
    Que poucos annos naõ tem.

A seu tempo se colhem as pêras, tornaõ a dizer as Comadres; ninguem
adiante juizos, e menos dê com a lingua nos dentes, até vir tudo
explicado no Folheto promettido.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Pata no Choco, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PATA NO CHOCO ***

***** This file should be named 31575-8.txt or 31575-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/5/7/31575/

Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
