The Project Gutenberg EBook of Folhas Soltas, by Alberto Dias Guimarães

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Folhas Soltas

Author: Alberto Dias Guimarães

Release Date: March 18, 2010 [EBook #31695]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOLHAS SOLTAS ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)





                        ALBERTO DIAS GUIMARÃES

                             FOLHAS SOLTAS



                        Sorrir é bom quando se tem ventura
                        ou quando, ao menos, feiticeira esp'rança;
                        arfa a existencia em mares de bonança,
                        rompe a alvorada sempre amena e pura.

                                               THOMAS RIBEIRO



                                  LISBOA
                TYPOGRAPHIA DA EMPREZA EDITORA O «RECREIO»
                     Rua do Marechal Saldanha, 59 e 61
                                   1894




                       ARGINE:

            Meiga rolinha de encantadas selvas
            Como me encanta o teu gentil cantar!
            Por ti perdera a mocidade, a vida...
            _--Mas eu não posso, não te devo amar.--_




A

E. A. N.


        A ti, virgem pura e casta;
        Offereço os cantos meus;
        Se queres pagar-m'os, basta...
        Um só olhar d'esses teus.

A palpitar de amor, dedico-te estas paginas delineadas nos curtos ocios
das minhas lides escolares...

Com ellas entrego-te as impressões dos meus vinte annos.

É bem triste este mimo, acceita-o... Estas flôres sem cultura... serão,
nas tuas mãos carinhosas... tão bellas e perfumadas como se a brisa
olente as bafejára.


Lisboa, 23-10-94

                                                            O AUCTOR...

      *      *      *      *      *




        Le travail, c'est le pére du plaisir.
                                VOLTAIRE.


O trabalho é companheiro afavel, dôce, puro... voto-lhe o pensamento, os
risos, a ternura, as vozes da amizade, os canticos do amor. Por isso,
quando a mão cruel do soffrimento me afflige sem ter dó, não deixo,
quebrantado, o trabalho... porque para mim tem condão.

É o meu consolo, o meu refugio, o bordão florido, regado com as lagrimas
ardentes do desespero.

      *      *      *      *      *




        Loucura ou sonho? mas eu creio e sinto,
        Soffro, resisto, sem allivio ter;
        Sou como o lyrio sem orvalho, extincto,
        --Se o amor é morte, quererei morrer--


Se eu fosse inspirado por Apollo, só assim cantaria meus desgostos; se
podesse banhar-me na fonte de Aganipe, mui feliz seria... pois, escripto
deixava quanto minha alma é triste como o pobre naufrago; como a voz do
sino, carpindo o funeral de um morto; triste como é a rosa quando com o
zephyro se vae desfolhando; triste como a chorosa mãe ao dizer adeus ao
estremecido filho... Minha alma é triste, como a ave que do ninho vae
arrebatada; triste, como a saudade, que sendo bella, é a mais triste flôr!

Replecto de prazer, sentia a alma expandir-se fremente, jubilosa; dentro
do meu craneo, agitava-se bem risonha a esperança formosa; tudo... para
mim... era canto, amor e poesia; tudo era bello e gentil! Sentia uns
fulgidos clarões e antevia deslumbradora aurora. Chimera vã!

Agora... punge-me o coração um presentimento cruel; vem-me enluctar o
pensamento... uma recordação do passado e, nos braços de atroz angustia,
fico mergulhado em ardentes lagrimas.

A juventude foge-nos tão veloz qual pluma ao vento... A illusão vem com
risos, mas não apaga as verdades amargas. Tudo passa! Tudo morre!

Felizes? Jámais! Do homem é unico e vario o fado; na terra só temos por
descanço a sepultura.

      *      *      *      *      *




        Porque hei-de preferir o riso ao pranto?
        Porque choro? porque scismo? Dôr sem fim!
        Hei-de deixar succumbir a esperança?


A phantasia, borboleta errante, em torno á chamma... sem cessar esvoaça.
A illusão passa e ella... ferida!... despenha-se na voragem. Ah! loucos
sonhos que a razão desmente! Pairar nos céos... para, no fundo abysmo,
baqueiar apoz! Immensa irrisão! Via o mundo qual vergel de luz, encanto
e fraternaes carinhos... Sonhei venturas, porém, a sorte quiz partir o
prisma que em falso brilho me occultava agrôres. Já não me alenta a
esperança da suspirada calmaria que a paz me deixe entrever. Minha alma
gélida e o meu ser, habitam n'um tantalo tormentoso de dôres! Sem
esperança, sem conforto! O idylio foi-se... Vejo a dôr surgir sempre
crescente.

É tão triste esta existencia sem uma luz que a conforte... Vida! vida!
Miseravel grão de poeira immunda... tantos dissabores me has dado!... O
prazer, o jubilo, os risos, a aurora... tudo pura ficção! O sol da
madrugada não dura todo o dia.

Para soffrer nasci; abraço a minha cruz; busco o tormento... Não devo
extranhar os espinhos da desdita. Quem foge á sua sorte? Oh! Deus...
concedei-me um raio de esperança e talvez volte a ser feliz.

      *      *      *      *      *




        A minha voz não canta, hoje só suspira e geme.

        Os desenganos só deixaram florir humildes violetas, no meu pobre
        jardim; offereço-t'as, donzella... São nascidas no canteiro,
        regado de lagrimas... no meu coração.


Que importa que o dever, o preconceito impiedoso prohiba de adorar-te?
Oh! sim... sim... na mente sempre hei-de guardar tua imagem ridente e
bella. És mais formosa que as estrellas, os lyrios, as alvas açucenas e
a singela violeta. Estrella da manhã, mystica rosa, teu candido sorriso
tem suave expressão... Oh!... dá-me um raio de luz, visão fagueira. A
tua voz tem da sereia o fementido encanto; d'uma harpa éolea faz lembrar
o som; quem póde ouvir-te e não sentir a dôce calma dos lêdos dias,
desapparecer, fugir? Tens um atractivo infindo, uma fragancia que só
pertence á rosa. Meiga, ideal, bemdita... guarda-me no peito.
Encantadora, angelica, sublime... ao vêr-te sinto o meu espirito
enlevar-se ás ethereas regiões, transpor o firmamento... Collo
formosissimo! arquejante... Olhos pretos, scintillando como o fulgor da
estrella vespertina; n'elles descubro a doçura dos typos ideaes da
Andaluzia... Olhos de um olhar tão fundo! olhos que fixam, fallam e
impõem! Sempre viva, irrequieta, graciosa... Elegante e esbelta! Quem me
dera repousar no quente arfar do teu querido seio...

Feição de cherubim, coração de pomba! És toda primor e esmero; és qual
fulgente estrella. A luz do teu olhar... deslumbra offusca, enlouquece.
Brilhante e seductora, mixto de sombra e luz, de lava e gelo, de eden
occulto e precipicio aberto... prendes, fascinas, attrahes, arrebatas.
Vêr-te e não sentir abrazar o peito, é só proprio de quem do amor é
renegado.

      *      *      *      *      *




        Não te mereço. O meu amor enlucta. Não sejas vencida pela illusão.

        Mas... se o teu olhar me reanima, se és a minha esperança
        querida... hei-de perder-te?

        Oh! não, não... mil vezes não.


Quizera ser poeta, um eximio trovador, para cantar-te em endeixas das
mais bellas; minha estrella, candida flôr de neve, quizera ter de Rubens
o pincel immorredouro para pintar a tua immagem bella; quizera ter de
Tasso a lyra que o inspirou para cantar tua formosura... Mas do tudo
careço; em vez da inspiração, apenas pobres phrases voam ao tom das
rajadas da indifferença. Quem me dera engenho e arte com que cantar: o
teu olhar divino; o teu collo moldado em candido alabastro; cantar: teu
corpo e a sua esplendida esculptura; teus labios, abençoado porto, onde
viriam soluçar as vagas de meus beijos... Acceita ao menos, meus pobres
queixumes; lyrios dispersos... sem valor algum!

.........................................................................

Era a vida, miragem seductora em quadros divinaes; era um sonho, um
encanto, um rir... Agora sinto n'alma o desalento... tudo fugiu
sorrindo... meus amores fenecem. Ephemera, bem ephemera foi minha
felicidade; onde borboleteavam as mais douradas chimeras, ha sinceras
desillusões; onde vicejava a flôr azul da esperança, medra o cardo do
desengano; onde conheci sonhos de felicidade, vejo phantasias desfeitas.
Sinto apenas a lethal serpente, a duvida, enroscar-se na minha alma.
Hei-de orar? Hei-de crêr?

      *      *      *      *      *




        Sou como a barca que ao largo perdeu o rumo. Existirei? Se
        existisse havia de quebrar a atroz melancholia que sinto
        aniquilar meu pobre coração.


To be or not to be! Ser ou não ser! O que me esconde esse dilema cruel!
Ter constantemente espinhos a cravarem-se n'alma embrutecida e presa!
Ser ou não ser feliz! Fatal problema! Debalde tento cantar gloria, vida,
sorrisos de amor... Uma angustia profunda me prime o peito; vejo
passarem os dias sem ter lenitivo, sem gosar calma! Cruel martyrio!

A vida é sonho dourado de illusões! sempre sonhar... do berço á campa, é
tudo um sonho. Que fadiga atormentadora! Espinhos acerados em toda a
rosa, fel em todos os amores. Na minha alma só vejo a bruma da tristeza;
nem sei a causa do pallido desgosto que sinto sem cessar! Quaes ruinas
de castello ogival, assim jazem na minha mente as dôces alegrias do meu
primeiro amor. Amor! amor! Inferno para uns... para outros um céo
aberto. Enygma eterno, eterna sphinge. Florida estrada, que uns leva á
gloria... ou senda de medonho precipio. És tudo e não és nada. És vã
chimera e realidade. Ou perdes ou salvas; és vida, senão morte.

      *      *      *      *      *




        Minha alma que um teu sorrir seduz, que um teu olhar inflamma...
        enleva-se, cae e perde-se no disco d'esse brilho, no lume
        d'esse fogo.


Anjo formoso, flôr celeste, candido jasmim... Como poderias encher de
luz e esperança a minha vida! perfumar os dias da minha mocidade! Debil
como o lyrio cujas folhas transparentes tremem ao mais leve sopro da
viração; teus olhos brilhantes dizem mil promessas, teem celestiaes
encantos.... Como encherias a minha vida de supremas alegrias e dôces
sorrisos! Sorrisos! Os teus são mais dôces que a luz da manhã, seguem-me
sempre, derramam em minha alma... mil bençãos do céo. Nas longas noites
de febre, quando a mente enfraquece... é a ti, anjo bemdito, é a ti que
eu peço sorrisos e olhares.

Nos sonhos ridentes, que a mente povoa de ideias de amor, vejo-te,
linda, nas... ondas do mar, nas petalas da rosa. Vejo-te e no meu peito
palpita, em ancias; pullula o coração. Figura celeste, por ti eu deliro;
meu peito anceia de dôr... vem acalmal-o n'um sonho amoroso... então...
cercar-me-ha ignota harmonia e o maior encanto.

És qual flôr que n'um vergel divino, com garbo ostenta purpurina côr; és
um anjo que baixou á terra; és qual estrella, que, na noite escura,
raiou formosa de brilhante luz; és como um astro que nos céos reside...
Fanal de esperanças, no qual contemplo... visão, miragem... ideal sem
par!

      *      *      *      *      *




        O que ouço, mudo e triste, n'esse languido olhar... revelará,
        pelo menos, amizade?


Bella como a flôr da serrania, radiosa como a estrella matutina. Teu
riso alenta meu cançado engenho. Não sei se é pasmo ou loucura o que
sinto ao divisar-te; tão grande é a expressão que tens na voz, no olhar,
no gesto e no sorrir! Ao vêr, de teus olhos, os raios tão ardentes...
nascem-me, no peito, frementes anhelos. Um breve sorriso de teus
labios... faz-me delirante de amor. Não sei o que sinta n'alma ao vêr
tuas faces bellas... é ancia, é febre. Sinto-me preso d'um terno
delirio, ouvindo teu fallar sonoro e fagueiro... Era ao sol posto,
quando me deste um riso; n'elle colhi um perennal sentir... Quiz
fugir-te... senti-me preso a ti. Em troca... offereci-te rosas. Dar uma
rosa parece nada ser... porém... com as que te dei... foi juncto o meu
pensamento!

Tudo em ti diz poesia e as auras beijam-te a fronte assetinada, pura
como a innocencia, pura como os beijos de minha santa mãe.

Nos momentos de angustia, quando no espaço olympico, fluctua a rainha da
noite... parece-me vêr n'ella a tua imagem seductora e sóbe-me á cabeça
a idéa de apertar-te fervorosamente em meus braços... porém... de
repente desfaz-se o encanto e volta de novo o pranto a deslisar pelas
minhas faces.

Ah! se o que sentimos n'alma só nos pertence; se a doirada calma dos
mesmos risos ambos nós sonhar-mos; se é a mesma a nossa estrella, o
nosso norte... então... aberto é o céu... amemo-nos!

      *      *      *      *      *




        Foste a palmeira frondosa a cuja sombra cahi; foste a fonte
        serena onde minha alma exhaurida cobrou alguma esperança.


Ah! porque tarde me brilhaste, estrella mimosa e bella, que ante mim
surgiste? Teu senhoril futuro, o teu porvir é de gloria e risos; os meus
sorrisos são gemidos! Soffro martyrios sem que jámais ouse testemunhar a
alguem... o meu pezar. Um desalento horrivel me aniquilla a vida; busco
suffocar os meus ais no peito... oh!... bem forçado é o meu rir d'agora.
Cedo me luziu, no raiar da vida, a luz do meu céu d'amores... Lamento
agora a illusão! Oh! sonho meu desfeito! Oh! mocidade.... Ha quem te
exalte as doçuras e te compare á madrugada! Tens encantos que seduzem,
bellos sonhos, graça, amor... mas tudo passa tão breve!... é, quando
nasce o sol e vens enfeitada como abril, é... então que os sorrisos mais
nos fogem... És uma cadeia de dôres!

Minha alma é triste! Amo a noite e a pallidez da lua, amo os queixumes
da fonte, os perfumes das flôres, o triste lamento da agoureira ave.
Sinto a dôce calma na paz da sollidão e vivo do sonhar dos sonhos
d'alma; é bom rever o céu d'amor; é bom sorrir ao som de uma harmonia!
Librei-me sobre a aza da ave da illusão... mas tombei da esphera ideal e
bemdicta, para... debalde, buscar a paz na solitude. Perdeu-se o
prenuncio da aurora! Já em meu peito não sinto o iris de bonança!

      *      *      *      *      *




        O amor nasce no peito e acaba no infinito.


Quando contemplo o brilho ethereo da lua... a minha alma dilatada,
volita pelos espaços... como ave partindo os nós a que estava
agrilhoada! Livre, na sua expansão, aspira a opalina luz e interroga a
si propria porque vigor mysterioso e porque occulto poder, vem tão dôce
effluvio avivar o teu olhar? Como póde em tom queixoso, tua voz dôce...
gemer e ter vibrações taes que me causam alegria? Como, no olhar
resumes... delirio, ardencia, paixão? Se é bello vêr-se a nympha
crystallina, entre as flôres, de manso sussurando; e as aves, a gorgear,
embaladas pela brisa da manhã; se é bello vêr os raios da lucina; se é
bello vêr-se o mar... dôce, queixoso... beijar a fulva praia com
brandura... ainda mais bello é vêr-se o sorriso em teus labios...
gracioso, qual a voz d'uma meiga lyra!

........................................................................

És toda a minha idéa... meus suspiros, meus tristes ais... a ti mando a
cada instante.

Se no desabrochar dos vinte annos, ha muita esperança formosa, muita
aspiração elevada... ha tambem muita tristeza, muita dôr amarga, muito
desgosto profundo. Até hoje, vi o raiar luminoso da manhã da vida, a
aurora rosea de uma existencia que desponta... pelas douradas côres do
prisma da illusão;... para mim, o bosque, o marulhar das vagas... tinham
sempre harmonias; o canto das aves era replecto de amor; o cardo, o
espinho, os goivos e os martyrios... eram rosas e jasmins... tinham mais
perfume que o nardo. Ora tudo é escuro, soturno e triste; na minha vida
houve luz, mas foi fugaz... como um meteoro... brilhou para bem prestes
se apagar!

      *      *      *      *      *




        O tempo não consome o que, pelo amor, é inscripto no peito!


Falla! quero escutar a musica sonora d'essas fallas gentis, trementes,
captivantes, que desprendem teus labios, a rir... esses labios mais
frescos e mais limpidos que o luar. Sorri! quero ouvir teus risos
festivaes, travessos... em ondinas febris de beijos incessantes...
soarem em tua bocca alegre. Fita-me! quero vêr, n'esse ideal encanto...
essa luz expludir suave... n'um sorriso do céu. Deixa-me banhar a alma
na essencia que evaporas; deixa-me ouvir tua voz melodiosa; quero a flôr
do teu riso, quero a luz do teu olhar.

A alma vae-me, em delirio, pelos plainos celestes... desfolhando-te
psalmos, seguindo entre o bando das chimeras... Apoz o devaneio, pousa
entre arminhos... na paz do teu peito.

Se me repudias!... oh! então... não mais te fixarei amorosamente; não
mais, oh! brilhantissimo astro, eu procurarei vêr-te; não mais fitarei
teu rosto, que encantos mil encerra.

Resta-me a esperança de ser indigno do teu despreso! Rogo-te, soluçando,
não olvides o teu humilde cantor.

        La vie par elle-même est courte, mais
        Le malheur l'allonge.
                                   (P. SIRUS.)

      *      *      *      *      *




        Tout un ciel est dans une goutte de rosée.
        Toute une äme est dans une larme.
                                           (ROUX.)






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Folhas Soltas, by Alberto Dias Guimarães

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOLHAS SOLTAS ***

***** This file should be named 31695-8.txt or 31695-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/6/9/31695/

Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
