The Project Gutenberg EBook of Necessidade de um Ministerio de Instrucção
Publica, by Antonio da Costa

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Necessidade de um Ministerio de Instrucção Publica

Author: Antonio da Costa

Release Date: June 13, 2010 [EBook #32794]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINISTERIA DE INSTRUCCAO PUBLICA ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)






                                NECESSIDADE

                                   DE UM

                      MINISTERIO DE INSTRUCÇÃO PUBLICA

                                    POR

                            D. ANTONIO DA COSTA



                                   LISBOA
                              IMPRENSA NACIONAL
                                    1868





                                NECESSIDADE

                                   DE UM

                      MINISTERIO DE INSTRUCÇÃO PUBLICA

                                    POR

                            D. ANTONIO DA COSTA



                                   LISBOA
                              IMPRENSA NACIONAL
                                    1868




NECESSIDADE DE UM MINISTERIO DE INSTRUCÇÃO PUBLICA


I

A organisação do ministerio do reino em Portugal era um estado no estado
até ha poucos annos. Dizemos estado no estado impropriamente, porque
melhor diriamos negação do estado. Negocios, que n'outros paizes
constituem quatro e cinco ministerios differentes, accumulavam-se, por
um phenomeno cuja explicação o paiz encontrava na carencia do progresso,
n'um unico ministerio, ligado por um chefe superior, que tinha o direito
da sciencia innata, e presidido por um ministro, que tinha a obrigação
de ser encyclopedico. Uma tal estagnação administrativa no centro do
movimento das idéas e das justas aspirações dos espiritos era a
impossibilidade governativa.

A creação do ministerio das obras publicas em 1852 deu o primeiro passo
no caminho da descentralisação. A reforma posterior de 1859, dividindo o
ministerio do reino em tres direcções independentes, se não pôde
ainda completar a idéa, foi todavia outro passo ousado na organisação
dos serviços e na facilitação de futuras reformas.

O systema centralisador, abolido em 1859, tinha tres inconveniencias
radicaes: a falta de unidade nos negocios, a impossibilidade de poder o
chefe superior da secretaria estuda-los devidamente, e a centralisação
nas mãos do ministro de assumptos insignificantes, com prejuizo do
regular andamento da alta administração, e com offensa ao senso commum,
que só inventou os ministros para os elevados pensamentos do estado,
para as iniciativas arrojadas e para as resoluções definitivas na
sciencia de governar.

Foi aquelle systema impossivel que a reforma de 1859 extinguiu, dispondo
assim o terreno para commettimentos descentralisadores mais productivos
e de que ella vinha ser a experiencia e o prenuncio.


II

Que resultados produziu o systema das direcções?

Restringindo-nos á direcção geral de instrucção publica, por ser a
especialidade que tratâmos n'este escripto, cujo intento é patentear a
indispensabilidade de um ministerio de instrucção nas condições que
havemos de expor, vamos indicar as principaes consequencias do
pensamento que presidiu á organisação descentralisadora. A arvore
produziu os seus fructos, e a fecundidade da tentativa é um dos
argumentos que prognosticam a efficacia do novo ministerio.

A direcção, pondo em pratica todos os meios de independencia e de acção
/propria/, que constituiam a sua rasão de ser, facilitando pela
correspondencia directa com as auctoridades e corporações a expedição e
preparação dos processos, e unificando-se nas suas diversas
especialidades como ramos da mesma arvore, realisou a idéa da reforma,
provando que sem a unidade do pensamento e a independencia
descentralisadora, que eram as suas bases, impossivel seria
alcançarem-se os resultados que a administração do ensino publico tem
obtido ha oito annos.

A partir do novo systema a organisação do ensino primario recebeu um
auxiliar na iniciativa local do municipio e da parochia, abriram-se as
duas escolas normaes, fundaram-se 483 cursos nocturnos, iniciaram-se as
conferencias do magisterio, publicou-se a reorganisação da instrucção
secundaria e do curso do commercio, estreando-se o ensino do desenho,
instante necessidade da epocha, promoveu-se a construcção de casas para
escolas, promulgaram-se regulamentos para os exames de habilitação, para
as jubilações, concursos, suspeições, e para occorrer á interrupção do
serviço, realisaram-se vendas importantes dos livros duplicados das
bibliothecas nacionaes, e com o seu producto adquiriram-se collecções de
livros modernos, verificaram-se duas inspecções extraordinarias em
todo o reino para estudar o estado moral, intellectual e material das
escolas primarias officiaes e livres, prepararam-se em resultado d'essas
inspecções trabalhos estatisticos, que brevemente hão de ver a luz e
servir de base á discussão das principaes questões do ensino. Outras
providencias se verificaram, e ainda outras se dispozeram que não
chegaram a receber sancção governamental.

Longe de nós o querermos indicar que a instrucção nacional corresponda
ao que d'ella exige o problema do seculo XIX. No correr d'este escripto
diremos o que pensâmos a tal respeito. Mas uma cousa são as grandes
reformas legislativas, outra a execução da legislação existente. O que
pretendemos evidenciar é que nem os ministros poderiam estar habilitados
para decretar, nem o conselho geral de instrucção publica para estudar e
preparar os trabalhos que foram commettidos ao seu illustrado parecer,
se não fosse o systema descentralisador de uma direcção independente, e
que os resultados patenteiam a necessidade de caminhar da direcção para
o ministerio, em vez de retrogradar para o tempo que morreu. A esta
necessidade só se póde acudir com um ministerio de instrucção publica.


III

A questão fundamental é a conversão da direcção geral de instrucção
publica n'um ministerio gerido cumulativamente com algum dos outros
ministerios por um só ministro.

A idéa não é nossa, é do actual ministro da marinha, o sr. Latino
Coelho, e por s. ex.ª apresentada em proposta ao conselho geral em data
de 21 de fevereiro de 1862. A nossa idéa iria mais adiante, pedindo um
ministerio de instrucção publica independente, mas, não sendo este o
momento opportuno, adoptámos a idéa do ministerio cumulativo.

Entretanto, aindaque a idéa não é nossa, seja-nos permittido
sustenta-la, mostrando como esta reforma urge indispensavelmente, e se
póde executar, não só sem augmento de despeza, mas até com economia.

A creação de um ministerio de instrucção publica justificam-a rasões de
ordem politica, de ordem administrativa e de progresso, diante da
necessidade de dar impulso ás variadas questões de um dos mais difficeis
problemas da governação, se não o mais difficil: o problema do ensino
nacional.

Para exemplo ahi está o mundo. Têem ministerio especial de instrucção
publica a França, a Italia, a Prussia, a Austria, a Baviera, a Suecia, a
Dinamarca, a Saxonia, tem-o a propria Russia, a propria Turquia e até a
Persia. Se a Hespanha o não possue ainda, já o descentralisou todavia do
ministerio da governação, e se a Belgica é excepção, é porque o ensino
n'aquelle paiz-modelo se baseia no systema da ampla liberdade, alem de
que tem duas direcções geraes de instrucção correspondentes a um
verdadeiro ministerio. Ora Portugal não póde ter rasão contra o mundo.

O primeiro fundamento, para se aconselhar a creação de um ministerio de
instrucção publica, é a necessidade de collocar á frente do ensino, na
successiva organisação dos gabinetes, um ministro especial. Por escusado
teriamos declarar que não tratâmos de pessoas, tratâmos da questão
unicamente na altura dos principios.

A feição caracteristica do ministro do reino em Portugal, e na maior
parte dos paizes, é a politica interna. Torna-se impossivel ao ministro
que tem a seu cargo a direcção da politica, da administração, da
policia, da beneficencia, da saude, prestar serio e incessante cuidado
ás innumeraveis questões da instrucção nacional, que pela nossa
organisação comprehende a instrucção primaria, secundaria e superior, as
bellas artes, as academias, as imprensas, as bibliothecas, os jardins
botanicos, os observatorios, os museus, e ainda outros estabelecimentos
cujo complexo a custo póde ser attendido, mesmo por um ministro exclusivo.

Duplica a impossibilidade, se attendermos a que se não trata só de
regular a questão do ensino, mas de estudar, de traçar e defender as
reformas nos diversos ramos, principalmente no da instrucção primaria, o
mais urgente e o mais difficil.

Assim, já porque o ministro do reino, collocado entre a direcção
politica do paiz e a instrucção publica, é constrangido a sacrificar a
instrucção, como os factos têem demonstrado no decorrer dos annos, já
porque a principal qualidade exigida para a pasta do reino é a
importância politica dos cavalheiros indigitados pelas situações que nas
lutas parlamentares conquistam o poder, é obvio que a pasta da
instrucção publica deve ser entregue em cada modificação de gabinete
áquelle dos ministros que pela ordem dos seus estudos e vocação especial
do seu espirito se ache mais nas circumstancias de gerir o assumpto.

Ha mais. É innegavel que as conveniencias politicas, mesmo as legitimas,
as que são admittidas pelos costumes e pela indole das instituições
constitucionaes, reclamam do ministro que dirige a politica interna
certas concessões. Todo o systema da instrucção se tem resentido d'este
facto, e dizemo-lo sem o receio de sermos desmentidos, não ha reformas
possiveis no circulo do ensino, principalmente do ensino superior, cuja
urgencia é por todos reclamada, emquanto essas reformas dependerem do
ministerio que tem a seu cargo a politica interna com todas as
complicações eleitoraes e locaes.

Outras rasões importantes se alliam a estas.

Sabem todos que durante a sequencia de cada anno economico ha sobras em
diversos capitulos do orçamento do estado. O fallecimento de
professores, a vacatura de cadeiras pelo movimento dos concursos, a
prohibição das accumulações de ordenados e outras circumstancias,
proporcionam sempre um saldo, que se deve naturalmente applicar a
melhoramentos da mesma especie, n'este caso a melhoramentos da instrucção.

Uma tal providencia é nos outros paizes um grande recurso para a
administração do ensino. Foi em virtude das sobras que ultimamente o
ministro da instrucção publica de França conseguiu augmentar em toda a
superficie do imperio o subsidio ás professoras de instrucção primaria.

Succede porém entre nós que este recurso póde deixar de ser applicado
exclusivamente á instrucção, por isso que o saldo da instrucção publica
não forma saldo da direcção geral, mas saldo de todo o ministerio do reino.

0 prejuizo é ainda mais grave, e pedimos attenção especial para as
seguintes considerações.

A instrucção primaria, dotada entre nós tão mesquinhamente, que apenas é
contemplada com a quarta parte da dotação geral da instrucção e
estabelecimentos litterarios, tem uma sobra annual de 23:000$000 réis,
cifra redonda. Se a esta sobra acrescentarmos a de 2:000$000 réis do
conselho geral, e a de 5:000$000 réis da instrucção especial, sobe o
saldo annual a 30:000$000 réis[1]. Estes 30:000$000 réis, em
vez de serem applicados á instrucção primaria, vão reforçar a instrucção
superior, alem das sobras da mesma instrucção superior reverterem
tambem para ella. Não será inferior, antes excederá a 40:000$000 réis o
total das sobras.

Quer dizer: mais de 40:000$000 réis na dotação geral da instrucção
publica deixam de ser applicados annualmente á desgraçada instrucção
primaria, podendo aliás com esta somma crearem-se mais quatrocentas e
cincoenta cadeiras, ou quarenta edificios escolares, ou o ensino
profissional, ou o que mais urgiria, como a primeira necessidade da
instrucção elementar, uma organisação da inspecção local em todo o
reino. O remedio para este assumpto importantissimo da melhor applicação
dos saldos ao ensino primario, só se conseguirá com a fundação de um
ministerio de instrucção publica.

Nem contra a idéa do novo ministerio poderão objectar com o augmento da
despeza, o cabo de Não das reformas portuguezas. Pelo contrario, a
organisação do novo ministerio terá por anjo protector a economia, esta
phantasiosa dama tão avidamente requestada nos tempos que vão correndo,
como desdenhosa entre os afagos com que pretendem seduzi-la.

A direcção geral de instrucção publica, actualmente composta de quatro
repartições, poderá, quando ministerio, abranger tambem os negocios da
sua contabilidade, se ao mesmo tempo se realisar o principio ha tanto
reclamado da simplificação dos serviços, já pela diminuição do
expediente, já pela descentralisação de negocios que passariam para os
estabelecimentos subalternos, como a nomeação dos empregados
inferiores, os espectaculos publicos e outros assumptos.

Exemplifiquemos, para ficar bem clara a nossa idéa. Que principio
justificará em pleno seculo XIX o anachronismo de dois diplomas regios,
decreto e carta, para a nomeação do mesmo funccionario? Que necessidade
insta por um acervo de decretos, de portarias, de alvarás, de officios,
e todo este labyrinto multiplicado ainda pelos registos, quando
bastaria, em geral, o simples despacho nos processos, e a sua publicação
no diario official?

O que dizemos do novo ministerio da instrucção publica, applicâmo-lo
tambem aos outros ministerios, porque uma das mais pestiferas chagas da
nossa organisação, ou desorganisação, é o nefando reinado da papelada.
Mais obras e menos palavras. Não achâmos que o paiz tenha funccionalismo
excessivo; o que tem é funccionalismo excessivamente accumulado. Ha
muitas repartições do estado que dispensariam parte do seu
funccionalismo, simplificado o expediente; mas tambem ha muitos serviços
que seria indispensavel crear ou reorganisar, e apontaremos entre elles
a reforma penitenciaria, a beneficencia, a estatistica, a inspecção e
outros.

Desculpe-se-nos termos descido a exemplificar estas ultimas
particularidades, mas era necessario fazermo-lo para levar aos espiritos
o convencimento por meio dos factos, que são a rasão pratica das cousas.


IV

Vamos concluir.

Demonstrámos que o systema das direcções foi um passo notavel, servindo
de transição natural para novas descentralisações, como a que se
indigita. Demonstrámos a indispensabilidade de converter a direcção
geral n'um ministerio de instrucção publica, que dê o impulso ás
reformas reclamadas em vão ha tantos annos. Demonstrámos finalmente que
a idéa do novo ministerio ligado a outro se póde realisar com economia,
e em todo o caso sem augmento nenhum de despeza.

Desenganemo-nos: não haverá reforma possivel na instrucção publica sem a
existencia de um ministerio especial. E, perguntâmos: querem demorar por
mais tempo as reformas da instrucção, e sobretudo da instrucção primaria?

Um paiz que no seculo XIX não possue uma só cadeira de ensino primario
superior nem profissional, que nas proprias escolas elementares
desconhece a educação physica, o desenvolvimento intellectual, e,
póde-se dizer, a educação moral, que não organisou ainda a sua
instrucção primaria na base indispensavel da localidade, que não tem
senão 331 cadeiras para o sexo feminino, um paiz que de 750:000 creanças
de sete a quinze annos de idade tem fóra da instrucção 650:000, cuja
media de creanças do sexo masculino é de 3 para 100 habitantes, e do
sexo feminino de 1 para 100; um paiz que não tem inspecção local, e
apenas a sombra de inspecção districtal, que não tem bibliothecas
populares, que não distribue livros, que não ensina ao povo nem desenho,
nem canto, nem principios de agricultura e industria; um paiz cujo
magisterio primario morre de fome, sem carreira gradual que lhe abra o
incentivo do futuro; um paiz cuja dotação do ensino primario, menor do
que a dotação do ensino superior, não encontra auxiliar valioso nos
recursos da associação nem do individuo; um paiz n'estas circumstancias
não é um paiz europeu, digamo-lo com profundo desgosto, é um paiz
semibarbaro.

Forcejemos porque não o continue a ser. Lembrem-se os poderes publicos,
e lembremo-nos todos, de que o problema da instrucção nacional é a
bandeira da liberdade e do progresso.

O governo acha-se auctorisado pela carta de lei de 9 do corrente mez de
setembro a reorganisar os serviços publicos. Está na mão d'elle dar o
grande passo para as reformas do ensino nacional, creando o ministerio
da instrucção publica nas condições que ficam delineadas. Não deixe
perder este ensejo, que talvez não se repita. Levante a questão do
ensino que roja apesinhada ha tantos annos. Avalie a responsabilidade
que tomou sobre os hombros e desempenhe-se d'ella, na especialidade que
tratâmos, com proveito para o paiz, que jazendo nas trevas tem sêde da luz.

Façam causa commum no assumpto as parcialidades que nos dividem. A
questão da instruccão publica não é uma questão de partidos, é uma
questão nacional, uma questão de vida ou de morte para o futuro da nossa
terra. Não está defronte d'ella a politica, está a nação.


FIM

    [1] Estas cifras são extrahidas das ultimas contas impressas do
    ministerio do reino, do exercicio do anno economico de 1864-1865,
    comparadas com a tabella das despezas auctorisadas para o mesmo anno.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Necessidade de um Ministerio de
Instrucção Publica, by Antonio da Costa

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MINISTERIA DE INSTRUCCAO PUBLICA ***

***** This file should be named 32794-8.txt or 32794-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/7/9/32794/

Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
