The Project Gutenberg EBook of Liga Patriotica do Norte, by Antero de Quental

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Liga Patriotica do Norte

Author: Antero de Quental

Release Date: June 18, 2010 [EBook #32872]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIGA PATRIOTICA DO NORTE ***




Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)





                           ANTHERO DE QUENTAL



                           ANTHERO DE QUENTAL


                        LIGA PATRIOTICA DO NORTE




                                BARCELLOS
                    Typographia da _Aurora do Cavado_
                              Editor--_R. V._
                                  1896



    Tiragem apenas de 100 exemplares:
    20 em papel de linho.
    80 em papel d'algodão.
    N.º___




O torpe e prepotente _ultimatum_ de 11 de janeiro de 1890, apresentado
ao nosso paiz pela Inglaterra, «a nossa fiel alliada» de tantissimos
annos, medrada e engrandecida por essa alliança e desde que ella em má
hora para nós começou, á custa de nossas riquezas, sob qualquer fórma
que ellas constituidas e manifestadas, de modo que ao passo que com
estas ella, a ilha ingrata, se foi opulentando, a passo igual foi o
nosso paiz decahindo e resvalando do mais preeminente lugar, do zenith,
entre as nações no inicio dos tempos modernos, para o mais infimo e
humilde lugar, para o nadir, nos tempos presentes, esse torpe e
prepotente _ultimatum_, terrivel guante de ferro levantado pela mais
poderosa das nações, formidanda por suas riquezas, por seu poderio, por
seus nenhuns escrupulos, sobre a cabeça da mais empobrecida e
enfraquecida d'ellas, não tanto pela idade, como pelas depradações e
traições de seus proprios filhos e de estranhos, abriu motivo
apparente--e só apparente, para o maior numero, ai de nós!--para uma
como reviviscencia e rejuvenescimento do nosso paiz, que, ferido em sua
justiça e em seus brios, de um extremo ao outro de seus dominios,
pareceu levantar-se, galvanisado pela dureza e brutalidade da affronta,
decidido a conquistar no convivio e conceito das nações o posto a que o
passado lhe dá incontestado direito, e a que a sua situação na Europa, e
seus ainda vastos dominios em tres outras partes do mundo, lhe garantem
_jus_.

Foi d'esse movimento vivo e unisono, e que se afigurara firme e
duradouro, e por certo o seria, se não fosse trahido e contrariado pelos
mais mesquinhos interesses, pelo mais miseravel egoismo, pelas mais
feias e negregadas traições, que rebentaram espontaneas e vividas, entre
outras muitas manifestações patrioticas, a subscripção Nacional e a Liga
Patriotica do Norte, para presidir a cujos destinos, assumindo sua
direcção, ninguem foi julgado mais competente e mais no caso de bem o
fazer, pelos predicados de seu passado, de seu talento e de seu amor
patrio e pela austeridade de caracter, do que Anthero de Quental.

Convidado para essa presidencia e direcção acceitou-as, e
superintendendo na organisação dos Estatutos da Liga, chegou a crer e
confiar nos destinos d'esta e em sua influencia benefica e decisiva para
o levantamento do paiz, como bem o testemunhou no discurso que proferio
em 7 de março d'esse anno de 1880 em sessão publica da Liga.

É esse discurso o transcripto em seguida.


                                                         Rodrigo Velloso




LIGA PATRIOTICA DO NORTE


_Meus senhores:_--Em primeiro logar, cumpre-me agradecer á assembleia
geral da «Liga Patriotica do Norte» a honra que me fez, nomeando-me seu
presidente. Esta honra considero-a no momento actual como a maior que um
cidadão póde receber dos seus concidadãos. Espero fazer da minha parte
para que a «Liga» me ache sempre á altura da confiança que o meu nome e
os meus antecedentes lhe inspiraram.

Meus senhores, creio firmemente que a fundação da «Liga Patriotica do
Norte» será a primeira pedra do edificio da restauração das forças
nacionaes. Não será esta porém uma obra de momentaneo enthusiasmo, mas
de aturada paciencia, de patriotica e esclarecida perseverança.

O protesto contra o insulto e a villania da Inglaterra, e o proposito de
nos libertarmos da sua aviltante dependencia, implica um esforço viril e
persistente para sermos de facto independentes, o que hoje não somos nem
politica, nem economicamente. A subscripção nacional, brilhante
movimento d'uma paixão nobilissima, será apenas o inicio d'essa obra de
resurreição do brio e das forças do povo portuguez. Se precisamos de
armamentos, precisamos todavia de mais alguma cousa do que simples
armamentos.

A vida actual, para ser automona e independente, tem de ser remodelada.
A nação tem de emendar erros profundos e numerosos, accumulados durante
muitos annos de imprevidencia, de egoismo, de maus governos e de
corrompidos costumes publicos. Esta situação é tanto mais grave, quanto
gradualmente se foi estabelecendo entre a nação e os governantes um
verdadeiro divorcio, divorcio ha muito latente e que a crise actual veio
apenas patentear em toda a sua cruel realidade. Os governos, em
Portugal, deixaram ha muito de representar genuinamente os interesses e
o sentir da nação. Nem por isso, porém, a acção da «Liga» será
revolucionaria. Pelo contrario, a «Liga» considera um tal divorcio como
uma calamidade, e a sua acção tenderá a restabelecer a natural harmonia
entre o pensamento nacional e o seu orgão, o Estado. Fóra das
competições da falsa politica, que nos tem dividido e enfraquecido, mas
por isso mesmo no terreno da verdadeira politica, que é a dos grandes
interesses nacionaes, fóra dos partidos, porque superior a elles, a
«Liga» fará ouvir aos poderes publicos a voz da nação: e essa voz
persistente, firme e cheia de auctoridade obrigal-os-ha, por muito
inveterado que seja o seu endurecimento, a converterem-se á sua
verdadeira missão, que é a dos representantes e zeladores dos interesses
da nação, e não só dos interesses materiaes, mas dos mais elevados, os
interesses moraes, e entre estes preeminentemente o da dignidade
nacional. A moralisação dos poderes publicos, tal é a primeira condição
do renascimento e integridade da vida social portugueza.

Por outro lado a «Liga», filha da opinião publica, e inspirando-se
n'ella, devolverá á sua inspiradora o seu proprio pensamento refundido,
tornado claro, consciente e pratico. Todos os alvitres, que a opinião
popular suggira, serão aqui estudados, revestidos, completados. D'elles
sahirá um plano de emancipação economica, de restauração das forças
productoras, de levantamento do nivel intellectual e de garantia e
defeza da integridade nacional, plano de ordem, justiça e moralidade
sociaes, que significará, ao mesmo tempo, a emenda dos passados erros e
a esperança d'um futuro em que Portugal retome entre as nações
civilisadas um logar digno das suas nobres tradições. Esse plano terá
por certo a adhesão do paiz, que verá n'elle a expressão consciente do
seu pensamento e das suas necessidades. A nação fal-o-ha seu e saberá
impol-o aos governantes. Contra a vontade unanime do paiz não
prevalecerão as artes corruptoras, com que uma oligarchia das menos
escrupulosas, aproveitando-se do indifferentismo e desleixada tolerancia
a que a nação se entregara, (reconheçamol-o com contricta sinceridade)
como quem abdica do seu direito e dignidade, conseguiu apossar-se da
alta administração e do governo, para nos conduzir, no fim de 30 annos
de materialismo politico, á beira de um abismo onde nos encontramos.

Taes são, senhores, os altos intuitos da «Liga Patriotica do Norte».
Resumindo-os, como acabo de fazer, cuido ter interpretado fielmente os
vossos unanimes sentimentos. Sahida do vehemente movimento de indignação
popular contra uma affronta que revelou á nação a sua propria fraqueza
em face da arrogancia dos fortes, a «Liga» propõe-se dar a esse
movimento um caracter permanente, disciplinal-o e alargal-o até ás
proporções d'um programma de reforma nacional.

As garantias efficazes de defeza da sua integridade e de respeito da sua
dignidade não póde a nação encontral-as senão n'uma profunda reforma da
legislação e costumes. Radicou fundo no animo de todos este pensamento.
Á «Liga Patriotica do Norte», assim como ás Associações congeneres, que
sem duvida se vão formar por todo o paiz, cumpre agora tornal-o
effectivo, dar-lhe fórma pratica e impol-o como a ideia directora d'uma
era de renovação nacional. Por arduo e trabalhoso que seja este grande
encargo, o patriotismo de todos os membros da «Liga» estará á altura
d'elle.

Por amor d'este fim supremo, sacrificaremos todos no altar da patria
intuitos e providencias particulares dissidencias, azedumes e
suspeições, triste legado d'um tempo de mesquinhas luctas, que
entibiaram ainda os melhores, e unidos n'um commum ideal, seremos fortes
por essa união indissoluvel, tão indissoluvel, como a unidade da patria,
cujo sentimento nos inspira a todos, sem distincções.

Terminarei, senhores, dando-vos conta dos meus actos, como presidente da
«Liga Patriotica do Norte.»

Em primeiro logar, como presidente da vossa commissão encarregada de
elaborar as bases do estatuto da Liga, esforcei-me por que esta nossa
lei fundamental exprimisse com a maior clareza e da maneira a mais
pratica o pensamento systematico e essencialmente popular e patriotico
da Liga. Foi-me esse esforço tanto menos custoso, quanto encontrei na
vossa commissão e em cada um dos seus membros luzes, dedicação e unidade
de pensamento, posso bem dizel-o, completas. Reconhecereis tambem, que,
apesar do nosso ardor, nos não era possivel desempenhar-nos do nosso
encargo n'um periodo de tempo mais curto, se considerardes que a obra
que nos incumbistes, além da sua complexidade, apresentava certos
problemas delicados de organisação que precisavam ser attentamente
estudados. Ella vos foi já apresentada, e ides julgal-a. Nada mais devo
accrescentar a este respeito; senão que ella representa o melhor não só
da nossa intelligencia como dos nossos sentimentos.

Em segundo logar, entendi do meu dever representar ao governo de sua
magestade, em nome da «Liga Patriotica do Norte», e pelos motivos que
todos conheceis, sobre a necessidade de ser retirado o _exequatur_ ao
consul inglez n'esta cidade. A vossa commissão installadora, por um voto
unanime, adheriu a esta minha iniciativa. Não vos encobrirei, senhores,
que redigindo aquelle documento a minha confiança na firmeza patriotica
dos membros do actual governo, confiança que a todos os portuguezes
deve, em principio, merecer qualquer governo portuguez, não podia ainda
assim destruir completamente no meu animo certas apprehensões e como que
um presentimento de que a nossa representação não seria coroada do bom
exito. Eram-me bem conhecidas as circumstancias, umas mais antigas,
outras actuaes, que reduzem quasi fatalmente os governos de Portugal a
um estado de timida dependencia perante o governo inglez. Entretanto,
além de que sempre se deve tentar o que é justo, animava-me um tanto a
consideração da attitude energica e que eu não tinha rasões para não
suppor patriotica, assumida pelo actual presidente do conselho de
ministros, tanto no conselho de estado como na imprensa, logo ao
rebentar do conflito anglo-portuguez.

Desgraçadamente, não eram mentirosos aquelles meus tristes
presentimentos. A resposta do Presidente do Conselho á nossa
representação, se attesta o empenho e bons desejos de S. Exc.ª em obter
algum desaggravo para a dignidade nacional, dá ao mesmo tempo testemunho
das insuperaveis difficuldades que rodeiam o assumpto, e é, para quem
bem ler aquelle papel, uma lamentosa confissão da impotencia do Governo
portuguez em face das arrogantes imposições do Governo inglez.

O Governo portuguez está inerme e coacto. É esta a cruel verdade. Convém
que se diga bem alto e que todos d'ella se compenetrem. É tal
actualmente a nossa fraqueza e dependencia, que o Governo portuguez não
póde sequer conseguir esta cousa simplissima: a liberdade no uso do seu
direito e a reparação, ainda moderada, d'um aggravo á dignidade
nacional. O Governo inglez entende impôr-nos o seu consul insultador, e
a nação portugueza tem de acceitar esta odiosa imposição. O governo
portuguez, embora gemendo, nol-o dá sufficientemente a entender!

Ah, Senhores! quanto custa a um coração portuguez ter de reconhecer esta
odiosa fatalidade! Mas devo reprimir os impetos da indignação, para só
attender á voz austera e salvadora da razão. Sim, tenhamos a coragem de
reconhecer essa cruel fatalidade, porque este reconhecimento será para
nós salutar. Não recriminemos, não augmentemos ainda mais as funestas
divisões que tanto nos têm enfraquecido. Saibamos antes tirar d'este
facto desolador o ensinamento que elle contém. Comprehendamos por elle
que o abysmo de fraqueza e humilhação, em que cahimos, é ainda mais
fundo do que suppunhamos, e que para sahir d'elle precisamos redobrar de
energia e patriotica dedicação. A desforra de tamanhas affrontas vem
longe ainda mas será segura, se soubermos preparal-a com firmeza, união
e perseverança.

A attitude que nos convém não é a do protesto violento e esteril: é a da
concentração da vontade, applicando-se indefessa até conseguir, pela
força e independencia reconquistadas, a desafronta, o socego e a
dignidade. Se ainda fossem necessarias provas, esta ultima humilhação
nos provaria quanto o pensamento da «Liga Patriotica» é único e
salvador; quanto é necessario e inadiavel que unidos n'esse só
pensamento, todos os Portuguezes trabalhem sem descanso pelo
levantamento da nossa infeliz patria, hoje ludibriada e sem defeza.
Coragem, paciencia e esforço: tal deve ser d'ora avante a nossa divisa.
Se a seguirmos á risca, o futuro, um nobre futuro, digno do nosso nobre
passado, nos recompensará amplamente pelos sacrificios do presente.






End of Project Gutenberg's Liga Patriotica do Norte, by Antero de Quental

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIGA PATRIOTICA DO NORTE ***

***** This file should be named 32872-8.txt or 32872-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/8/7/32872/

Produced by Pedro Saborano (produced from scanned images
of public domain material from Google Book Search)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
