The Project Gutenberg EBook of Influencia da Religião sobre a Politica do
Estado, by Inácio José de Macedo

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Influencia da Religião sobre a Politica do Estado

Author: Inácio José de Macedo

Release Date: November 12, 2010 [EBook #34289]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INFLUENCIA DA RELIGIÃO SOBRE ***




Produced by Mike Silva





                               INFLUENCIA

                                   DA

                                RELIGIÃO

                                SOBRE  A

                           POLITICA DO ESTADO.

                              PELO  AUTHOR

                       _DO VELHO LIBERAL DO DOURO._




                              LISBOA:  1826.
               NA IMPRENSA DA RUA DOS FANQUEIROS N.º 129 B.
                              _Com licença._




INFLUENCIA DA RELIGIÃO

SOBRE A

POLITICA DO ESTADO.



            _Dai a Deus o que he de Deus,
            e a Cesar o que he de Cesar._

                           S. Matth. 23.

Montesquieu no seu livro intitulado _Espirito das Leis_, diz: que a
Religião Catholica Romana he mais propria para os Governos Monarchicos;
e que a Religião Protestante he mais propria para os Governos
Republicanos. No livro que trata das causas da decadencia do Imperio
Romano, diz: que a Religião Christã concorreo muito para a decadencia do
Imperio dos Cesares. Eu respeito muito os talentos, e singular agudeza
daquelle grande homem; mas não posso concordar com taes proposições, nas
quaes não diviso sombras de probabilidade; antes diviso asserções
indecorosas á Magestade da Religião do Salvador.

O seculo, em que vivemos, he mui propenso a fazer jogo da Religião para
todas as revoluções politicas. Os impios, bem assim como os fanaticos,
querem achar na Religião os documentos dos seus caprichos; e parece que
não ha mais nobre tarefa para hum Escriptor publico, do que illustrar
os homens em similhantes crises, para que não se abuse do que ha
sobre a Terra de mais sagrado, e para que não se invoque o Nome de Deos
em vão no meio de ridiculos partidos, e de commoções anarquicas, que são
filhas todas dos nossos erros, e das nossas loucas paixões.

Tornemos pois a Montesquieu; e confundamos a mania daquelles, que
pertendem achar na Religião pretextos para dourar imposturas.

O Filho de Deos na plenitude dos tempos foi mandado do Ceo á Terra para
reconciliar o Ceo com o Mundo; para enlaçar a Natureza com a Graça; e
para fazer de todos os Povos hum só Povo, digno do Agrado do Pai
Celeste. Prégou a todos sem distincção de Governos; e mandou os seus
Discipulos por todo o Orbe, sem lhes fazer excepções de Reinos, ou de
Republicas; de Governos Absolutos; ou de Governos Representativos. O seu
fim era plantar o imperio da verdade e da virtude sobre as ruinas da
mentira e do vicio; e os Apostolos tiverão a mesma linguagem diante dos
Reis, que diante dos Presidentes do Areopago. Era para elles
indifferente annunciar o Reino de Deos nas Monarchias da Asia, ou nas
Republicas da Grecia. Façamos pois este raciocinio para refutar sem
replica, não só a proposição de Montesquieu, como a pertenção daquelles,
que prégão o Absolutismo, como fundado no Christianismo.

    A Religião Catholica Apostolica Romana foi trazida do Ceo para todo o
    Mundo a seguir.--Ora o Mundo era composto de differentes Governos,
    Absolutos, Representativos, Monarchicos, Democraticos, Republicanos,
    Mistos, &c.--Logo a Religião Catholica Apostolica Romana he propria
    para todos os Governos.

Logo he hum absurdo affirmar que a Religião Catholica não he propria
para os Governos Livres; e he perigosissimo erro affirmar que os
Governos Constitucionaes são incompativeis com a Religião de Jesu
Christo. A Religião não tem nada com as fórmas dos Governos. O Salvador
declarou, que o seu Reino não era d'este Mundo. Elle ordenou a seus
Discipulos, que obedecessem aos Governos, estabelecidos em todo o Orbe;
e não lhes mandou indagar os Titulos por que elles governavão. Donde se
infere, que a Religião não influe sobre as differentes especies de
Monarchias, ou de Republicas; e que os Padres não estão authorisados em
virtude do seu Santo Ministerio a declamar contra Governos
Constitucionaes, ou não Constitucionaes; e nem a elles compete tomar
partidos pela Pessoa, ou pela fórma do Governo Politico.

Este argumento he de bem facil comprehensão; e queira Deos que elle seja
espalhado por todas essas Aldeas para desengano de alguns Padres, que
sabem mal estas materias, e para desengano do Povo, que deve fechar os
ouvidos a qualquer doutrina contraria; pois que já S. Paulo dizia ao seu
rebanho, _que depois delle virião lobos em lugar de pastores, que não
saberião apascentar os rebanhos; e que não podendo soffrer a sua
doutrina, se converterião para as fabulas_.

Qualquer Ecclesiastico he hum Cidadão muito respeitavel em quanto dirige
o Povo com a palavra e o exemplo pelos caminhos da salvação; mas quando
se intromette em questões politicas, e desvaira o Povo para partidos, he
hum falso Profeta de Belial; e he tão perigoso ao Throno, e á
tranquillidade publica, quanto indigno da Religião, que parece
professar. Nem o Evangelho, nem as Epistolas dos Apostolos, e nem a
Tradição dos antigos Padres da Igreja authorisão os Ministros da
Religião Catholica a intrometter-se com a Politica dos Governos; e por
isso Montesquieu não tem razão em affirmar que esta Religião não he
propria para os Governos Livres. Nem elle póde argumentar com o exemplo
de alguns Papas, que nos seculos da barbaridade Gothica se intromettêrão
com a Politica de alguns Governos. Os abusos não fazem argumento nestas
materias. A Religião sempre condemnou, e ainda hoje condemna similhantes
procedimentos. As questões do Sacerdocio e do Imperio já estão bem
elucidadas; e o mesmo Governo Portuguez em differentes epochas tem
mostrado que sabe manter o Throno em todo o seu esplendor contra
pertenções abusivas do Sacerdocio. Já se sabe o que he de Deos, e o que
pertence a Cesar; e nem a Junta Apostolica nos ha de atirar terra nos
olhos, porque já veio muito tarde para renovar as scenas de sangue, que
o fanatismo apresentou na Europa. Nunca a sciencia da Religião esteve
tão apurada como agora, apesar das impiedades do seculo; e os Padres
doutos das nossas eras não fazem senão remontar aos primeiros seculos da
Igreja para beberem nas fontes limpas dos Apostolos e dos Santos Padres
as doutrinas que ficárão escurecidas, e viciadas no seculo decimo, e nos
seculos subsequentes, até que a restauração das letras _arrancou o joio,
que o homem inimigo semeou na seara do Pai de Familias_; e espalhou o
clarão Divino da luz, que a invasão dos Vândalos tonsurados tinha
escondido debaixo da _rasa_.

Vandalos tonsurados chamou Pope aos Padres Godos, que convertendo-se ao
Christianismo, trouxerão para elle restos da sua barbaridade, e que
parece, deixárão sementes, entre nós. No Paço Archiepiscopal de Braga
ainda estão os retratos de muitos com medonhos bigodes, e ameaçantes
mitras, segundo a moda daquelles tempos; e alguns delles forão
excellentes Pastores, e mui ornados de virtudes no meio das trevas, que
então offuscavão o firmamento da Igreja.

Mas deixemos esses seculos, e esses usos, que pouco nos podem instruir;
e remontemos aos dias de Ambrosio, e Agostinho, para aprendermos o como
os Padres se devem conduzir no meio das mudanças, e dos Governos Politicos.

O Imperio Romano depois das guerras civis de Mario, e Syla, e depois do
despotismo dos Cesares, hia cahindo aos pedaços debaixo do seu luxo, e
dos seus vicios, sem que o Christianismo tivesse parte nos seus
desmanchos, como Montesquieu pertende: e nem a humanidade dos Titos, nem
a filosofia dos Antoninos, nem o codigo de Justiniano, nem a valentia de
Belizario podião evitar sua ruina; porque a maquina estava velha, as
molas reaes da virtude consumidas; e o roedor despotismo, que tinha
feito baquear o Imperio dos Chaldeos, e dos Persas, ainda possuia o
mesmo prestimo, que tem hoje, que he--acabar com tudo, e acabar comsigo
mesmo.--

Neste estado de fraqueza, de ignorancia, e de crime, os Barbaros do
Norte se despenhão em cima do Imperio, como huma torrente dos Alpes,
quando o gelo se descoalha em cima dos miseraveis, que estão descuidados
nas suas fraldas. Sobre a ruina do Throno Cesareo se estabelecem
differentes Reinos com differentes fórmas de Governo em toda a
Christandade; e qual foi a conducta dos Papas, dos Bispos, e de todos os
Sacerdotes Catholicos? Gemêrão entre o Vestibulo, e o Altar:
reconhecêrão os novos Reis dos Godos, dos Ostro-Godos, e dos
Vandalos, como havião reconhecido os Governos Cesareos; e nunca se
intromettêrão com as mudanças politicas, apesar de que ellas influião
consideravelmente sobre a paz da igreja. Soffrêrão desterros e martyrios
no Governo dos Barbaros, como no Governo de Decio e Diocleciano; e
jámais questionárão sobre a legitimidade de taes Governos. Santo
Agostinho teve o desgosto de ver ainda a invasão dos Godos, que
destruírão os Templos; e chorando sobre as ruinas de Carthago, como
Jeremias sobre as ruinas de Jerusalem, compunha o seu Livro da Cidade de
Deos, no qual ensinou á Posteridade a respeitar as Authoridades, que a
Providencia Divina colloca sobre os Povos para os reger com vara de
furor, ou com sceptro de clemencia. S. Jeronymo fugindo ás intrigas da
Corte, foi traduzir a Biblia nas grutas de Belem; e outros forão para a
Thebaida e Desertos do Egypto estabelecer a vida monastica, que era bem
differente do que he hoje; e que elevando os espiritos á contemplação
das verdades eternas, os distrahia das questões do seculo, que só
pertencem áquelles, a quem Deos entregou o cuidado temporal de dirigir
as Nações.

No entanto ficárão muitos Pastores e Presbyteros para animar os Fieis no
meio da invasão dos Barbaros: prégavão o Evangelho aos novos Reis, e
novos Povos, e convertendo muitos ao Baptismo, inspirárão aos Barbaros a
doçura Evangelica, e estendêrão o Reino de Deos em todos os Reinos da
Terra. Seguio-se dahi, que os Barbaros forão insensivelmente perdendo a
sua ferocidade: os Reis fundárão muitas Igrejas; abandonárão a sua
Idolatria; e a Religião do Calvario correo desde o Tibre até ás margens
do Baltico.

Se o Christianismo influio naquelles Governos e naquelles Povos, foi
só com a persuasão, adoçando os costumes, melhorando as Leis barbaras
dos Lombardos; e nunca traçando planos, nem de Governos Representativos,
nem Absolutos. Em quanto os Francos fazião os seus Estados Geraes, em
quanto Carlos Magno fazia os seus Capítulares, e outros Reis partilhavão
a Europa ao seu arbitrio, os Padres convertião os Gentios, prégavão a
obediencia aos Povos, apresentavão aos Reis os Juizos de Deos sobre
elles, e não querião saber das questões do Campo de Marte, nem das
Juntas Legislativas. Tanto as antigas Decretaes, como o Tridentino na
Sessão 22 _de Reformatione_ prohibio sempre ao Clero a ingerencia em os
negocios seculares.

Logo a influencia da Religião sobre a Politica dos Governos era nenhuma;
e os Pregoeiros do Evangelho não fazião mais que exterminar vicios,
plantar virtudes, destruir erros, e ganhar conquistas para o Ceo.

Se os Papas e os Bispos tiverão no andar do tempo uma influencia mui
positiva em os negocios politicos, foi porque os Reis assim o quizerão;
e talvez porque assim convinha aos interesses da Europa naquelles
tempos, assim como hoje convem ao Systema Representativo de Portugal
nomear os Bispos para Pares do Reino. Porém o espirito da Religião nada
influe sobre essas cousas; e nem responde pelos resultados da maior, ou
menor influencia, que os Reis dão ao Sacerdocio sobre os Negocios do
Imperio. A Religião não olha para Systemas Politicos; olha para a
salvação dos homens: o seu Reino he eterno; e os seus Dogmas
fundamentaes não são variaveis, e sujeitos á vicissitude dos tempos,
como os Dogmas da Politica terrena. Cessem pois os amigos, ou
inimigos da Religião de affirmar que ella tem huma influencia
positiva sobre os systemas de Governo. A sua influencia he só sobre os
costumes; e quando parece ser sobre os systemas, he isso obra dos
membros da Religião, e não dos dogmas, que fórmão a sua essencia. Não
confundamos a obra de Deos com a obra dos homens; e não attribuamos ao
espirito do Evangelho a conducta deste, ou daquelle Sacerdote, que falla
e obra segundo os seus interesses, ou as suas paixões, e não segundo as
maximas, que lhe deixou Jesu Christo, e os seus Apostolos.

O assassinato de Henrique IV, e Carlos I não foi obra da Religião, foi
obra do fanatismo; e a instituição do Santo Officio, e revoluções de
alguns Estados não forão dictames do Evangelho; forão introducções dos
erros do tempo, e da incuria dos Reis, que não conhecêrão bem, nem os
interesses do Throno, nem a Doutrina do Salvador. A Escriptura Santa
está cheia de sentenças terriveis contra os máos Governos, e contra os
Povos revoltosos. Ella amaldiçoa os Tyrannos; grita contra as revoltas
das Tribus: mas nem manda aos Povos que se revoltem, nem patrocina os
Reis, que abusão do seu poder. Louva hum Josias piedoso, condemna hum
Assuero tyranno, e não quer que os seus Discipulos conspirem contra nenhum.

Herodes era hum valido de Cleopatra Rainha do Egypto, o qual Marco
Antonio tinha nomeado para Rei dos Judeos por indecentes principios de
patronato; e quando elle disse a Jesu Christo que tinha poder de o
matar, Jesu Christo não lhe contestou o poder, e só disse: _não terias
poder em mim, se o Ceo não o tivesse assim querido_. Tal he a frase da
Religião em todos os Governos; e ella sempre reputou como discolos e
anarquistas os Sacerdotes que procedem d'outra maneira, deixando o
seu ministerio pacifico para se complicarem, como diz o Apostolo, com os
negocios seculares. _Os Principes das Nações buscão o dominio_, disse o
Salvador aos Apostolos; _mas vós não deveis fazer o mesmo_.--Vos autem
non sic.--

Nos Reinados de Fernando de Castella, e de Isabel de Aragão appareceo
Colombo, e servio-se de hum frade Confessor do Paço, para fazer com que
o Governo lhe desse auxilios no descobrimento do Novo Mundo, a fim de
converter almas para o Ceo. Esta idéa concorreo para se fazer a primeira
Expedição, e outras subsequentes; e daqui vem dizerem alguns, que a
Religião influio na Politica Hespanhola para as barbaridades que Pizarro
e Cortez commettêrão no Mexico, e no Perú. Mas para que attribuir ao
Evangelho a desmarcada cubiça do ouro, que animava os Hespanhoes; e o
desejo de estender os seus Dominios, que devorava o seu Governo? Se
alguns Padres concorrêrão para aquellas horrorosas ladroeiras, não foi
porque a Religião lhes ensinasse tal conducta; foi porque erão indignos
filhos da Igreja, e porque misturados com a soldadesca contrahião os
seus licenciosos procedimentos. O Bispo de Las Cazas, S. Francisco
Xavier, Padre Anxieta, e outros, derão á Religião hum credito immortal
entre os Indios; e se a Religião influio alguma cousa naquelles
negocios, foi para adoçar a sorte dos conquistados, e tornar mais
brandos os conquistadores.

Envergonhem-se pois os Padres das nossas eras, que abusão da Religião,
querendo influir no confessionário e no pulpito sobre o Systema
Politico. Inculquem aos Povos o respeito e veneração para com as Leis, e
o Governo da Patria, que acharem existente: e se mesmo o Governo
qualquer perseguir a Religião, não conspirem contra elle, porque os
antigos Padres nunca conspirárão contra os Dioclecianos. He o cumulo da
insolencia, e da ignorancia declamar hum Abbade, ou outro qualquer
Sacerdote contra hum Governo, com o pretexto de que elle não he
legitimo; ou de que he contrario á Religião. Quem lhes deo authoridade
para se erigirem em Juizes dos Governos? Obedeção, e preguem o Reino de
Deos. Basta de enxovalhar a Religião de huma maneira tão indecente, e
tão desconhecida dos primeiros Discipulos do Salvador. Não lhes basta o
abuso, que elles muitas vezes fazem do thesouro dos pobres? Para que
querem dar aos impios mais pretextos para declamarem contra a Religião?
Para que vituperão o seu Ministerio? Não sabem, que o fanatismo he tão
perigoso como a libertinagem? Concluamos pois, que a Religião não influe
sobre a Politica dos Estados, senão persuadindo com a palavra, e o
exemplo, para abrandar o Genio dos Reis, e melhorar os costumes dos
Povos: O mais he detestavel abuso.

Os Padres da mais alta Jerarquia não podião ter sobre a Terra maior
poder, do que aquelle que teve o Salvador. Ora, o Salvador declarou
abertamente diante de Pilatos, que não tinha algum poder sobre os Reinos
do Mundo; logo os Padres da mais alta Jerarquia não tem algum poder
sobre os Reinos do Mundo. _Se o meu Reino fosse deste Mundo_, disse o
Salvador a Pilatos, _os meus Ministros havião de combater, e disputar
para que eu não fosse entregue aos Judeos; mas o meu Reino não he deste
Mundo_.--Si ex hoc mundo esset Regnum meum, ministri mei utique
decertarent ut non traderer Judeis: nunc autem Regnum meum non est hinc.
S. João. 18. v. 36.

Verdade he, que o Salvador depois de haver triunfado da morte no
Sepulchro, disse--_Foi-me dado todo o poder no Céo, e na Terra; e eu vos
mando por esse Mundo, como meu Pai me mandou_--Mas este poder he
meramente espiritual, como evidentemente se infere das subsequentes
palavras, nas quaes desenvolve a natureza deste poder dizendo--_Hide,
prégai, baptisai em meu Nome, e ensinai os homens a observar o que eu
vos tenho ensinado._--

Dividírão os Apostolos entre si esta immensa tarefa, e com as armas da
palavra, e do exemplo influírão muito sobre a ignorancia, e os costumes
do seculo; mas nunca influírão sobre a fórma das Republicas Gregas, nem
do despotismo oriental. A Lei Evangelica nada tinha de commum com as
Leis Politicas. Os Apostolos fugião dos máos Governos, que não os
querião escutar; mas não dizião aos Povos, que se revoltassem contra os
Reis impios, e inimigos da Igreja, Elles ensinárão, que resistir ao
poder era resistir á Ordenação Divina; e pela palavra poder entendião
indistinctamente qualquer Governo. Logo, ainda que o Governo
Constitucional, dado pelo Senhor D. PEDRO, Legitimo Rei destes Reinos,
fosse hum Governo offensivo aos interesses da Igreja, não tinhão os
Padres direito para lhe resistir, e para ensinar aos povos a
desobedecer-lhe. Devião rogar a Deos por elle, ainda, que fosse herege;
e quando vissem, que elle lhes ordenava cousas contrarias á vontade
expressa de Deos, devião sacudir o pó dos sapatos, e fugir para outro
Reino; ou soffrer o martyrio, porque em tal caso _he melhor obedecer a
Deos, do que aos homens_, como dizia S. Paulo, quando fugia, de hum para
outro clima.

A falta de Luzes sobre esta materia já ateou na Europa vergonhosas
contendas entre o Sacerdocio, e o Imperio. O poder temporal he
essencialmente diverso do poder espiritual. Nem os Reis podem absolver
peccados, e consagrar hostias; nem os Padres podem julgar Governos, nem
fazer Leis: e qualquer ingerencia que elles possão ter sobre as Leis, e
Politica do Estado, não he filha do poder que Jesu Christo lhes deo; he
sim dimanada da generosidade dos Soberanos, que tem querido honrar por
este modo os Successores dos Apostolos.

Se os Artigos do Concilio de Trento, que não são essenciaes ao espirito
da Religião, tem voga e força em nossa Legislação, he porque os Senhores
Reis de Portugal os quizerão acceitar, misturando o Direito Canonico com
as Leis do Reino; aliás não terião algum vigor, como na França, aonde
taes Artigos não tiverão a mesma legal acceitação.

Limitem-se pois os Padres a prégar o Reino de Deos; a conduzir os Povos
pela estrada, que vai do tempo á eternidade; a persuadir a todos, que
obedeção ao Governo, que se achar estabelecido em o Throno; e não
queirão influir sobre aquillo, em que o seu Divino Mestre nunca influio.
Lembrem-se que Padres de mui alta Jerarquia, mesmo em o nosso Reino, já
forão victimas de huma justiça severa, por quererem resilir, e saltar da
linha de conducta, que o Evangelho lhes tem traçado. A Igreja ainda não
escreveo, nem escreverá em seu Martyrologio o nome daquelles, que tem
padecido por conspirarem contra os Soberanos. A Igreja só canoniza os
que padecem pelo Nome de Jesu Christo; e não reconhece por filhos os
perturbadores do Estado, e os semeadores de doutrinas, que não tem outro
fundamento, que o seu máo genio, e ambiciosa fantasia.




Vende-se na Typografia da Rua dos Fanqueiros N.º 129 B--e nas Lojas de
Livros de Caetano Antonio de Lemos, Rua do Ouro N.º 112--Romão José da
Silva, aos Martyres--Antonio Marques da Silva, Rua Augusta N.º 199--

Igualmente se acha no Porto na Rua das Flores N.º 102.--Preço 80 reis.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Influencia da Religião sobre a
Politica do Estado, by Inácio José de Macedo

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INFLUENCIA DA RELIGIÃO SOBRE ***

***** This file should be named 34289-8.txt or 34289-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/2/8/34289/

Produced by Mike Silva

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
