The Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoria sobre o melhoramento da cultura da
Beira e da navegação do Mondego, by António de Almeida

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Memoria sobre o melhoramento da cultura da Beira e da navegação do Mondego

Author: António de Almeida

Release Date: November 17, 2012 [EBook #41389]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMORIA SOBRE O MELHORAMENTO ***




Produced by Rita Farinha, Alberto Manuel Brandão Simões
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)





    *Nota de editor:* Devido à existência de erros tipográficos neste
    texto, foram tomadas várias decisões quanto à versão final. Em caso
    de dúvida, a grafia foi mantida de acordo com o original. No final
    deste livro encontrará a lista de erros corrigidos.

                                           Rita Farinha (Novembro 2012)




MEMORIA
SOBRE O
MELHORAMENTO DA CULTURA DA BEIRA
E DA
NAVEGAÇÃO DO MONDEGO

POR

D. Antonio d'Almeida

ALFERES DO EXERCITO
COM O CURSO COMPLETO DE ENGENHARIA
EM COMMISSÃO HYDROGRAPHICA
NO CONCELHO DE MONTEMÓR O VELHO.


Dezembro de 1857.


COIMBRA
IMPRENSA DA UNIVERSIDADE
1858.




MEMORIA
SOBRE O
MELHORAMENTO DA CULTURA DA BEIRA
E DA
NAVEGAÇÃO DO MONDEGO.




MEMORIA
SOBRE O
MELHORAMENTO DA CULTURA DA BEIRA
E DA
NAVEGAÇÃO DO MONDEGO

POR

D. Antonio d'Almeida

ALFERES DO EXERCITO
COM O CURSO COMPLETO DE ENGENHARIA
EM COMMISSÃO HYDROGRAPHICA
NO CONCELHO DE MONTEMÓR O VELHO.


Dezembro de 1857.


COIMBRA
IMPRENSA DA UNIVERSIDADE
1858.




Um grande numero de rios da Europa, que antigamente corriam placidos
entre as suas margens, appresentam hoje um curso extremamente irregular;
as suas inundações formidaveis causam nos valles, que deveriam
fertilisar, desastres, cuja repetição deu o alarme ás povoações
marginaes.

O Sena, o Loire, o Saone, o Isère, o Rhodano o Durance têm assolado a
França 'nestes ultimos annos com inundações cada vez maiores. Na Italia
o Tibre e diversos outros rios, pelas suas frequentes enchentes,
flagellam os valles. Em Portugal o Tejo e o Mondego offerecem phenomenos
similhantes; se entre nós não foram estes tão desastrosos como em outros
paizes, a perda das sementeiras, das colheitas, dos gados e dos
instrumentos de lavoura, têm sido por vezes o resultado funesto para a
importante classe dos lavradores.

Cabe pois ao Governo, sentinella avançada dos interesses do Paiz, mandar
estudar e executar os trabalhos indispensaveis para remediar o mal, aos
homens da arte indagar qual deva ser o remedio applicavel com mais
vantagem e menos dispendio.

Conheço as minhas fracas forças para arrostar com tão ardua tarefa,
porém desejo ser util em alguma cousa: se errar, sirva ao menos esta
memoria de lembrar a penas mais habeis a importancia da questão, para,
com a emenda, fazer surgir a verdade.

A causa das inundações é, como todos sabem, a concurrencia rapida e
quasi simultanea em o leito dos rios das massas aquosas parciaes,
trazidas pelos seus affluentes quando as chuvas são copiosas ou são
reforçadas pelo derretimento das neves nas montanhas; mas sendo a bacia
dos rios a mesma que outr'ora, não tendo variado as circumstancias
climatericas, por que motivo os mesmos phenomenos naturaes produzem hoje
na Europa effeitos que antigamente se não davam e não têm lugar ainda
hoje na America, onde a civilisação está menos adiantada? A razão é
obvia: é porque na America as montanhas ainda estão cubertas de mattas
virgens que demoram as aguas, em quanto que na Europa a população mais
densa roteou os montes para se alimentar.

Quasi todos os autores estão concordes em attribuir a esta causa os
estragos produzidos pelas aguas nos valles.

Juliano narra que no seu tempo o Sena corria sempre limpido com um nivel
quasi constante; hoje as suas aguas são turvas, e o seu nivel eleva-se
ás vezes de 6 até 8 metros[1]. Esta mudança, diz M. Marry, é
evidentemente devida á cultura dos terrenos inclinados, antigamente
cobertos de mattas. Mais adiante, lê-se no mesmo tractado: «O que tem
occorrido durante alguns annos successivos na bacia do Rhodano, prova
que a roteação do Jura e principalmente dos Alpes teve para as bacias
que recebem as suas aguas as consequencias as mais funestas.»

Voltando ao nosso Mondego, parece que antes de 1400 os senhorios
obrigavam os rendeiros do campo _a fazerem ahi pousadas e moradas, e a
morar nas terras corporalmente por si e suas pessoas_.

No cartorio de S. Pedro em Coimbra existe uma sentença proferida na éra
de 1392 pelo Vigario da dicta cidade contra um inquilino: no pleito foi
allegado pela senhoria que era costume antigo _pagarem os lavradores que
morassem nas terras que as Egrejas de Coimbra tinham no campo o dizimo
dos fructos e crianças_[2] á Egreja, cujas forem as dictas _terras_[3].

Ouvimos pela primeira vez fallar nas inundações do Mondego em uma Carta
Regia de D. Affonso V, do anno de 1464, que prohibe as queimadas e
roteação das alturas vertentes no Mondego. (Lei que se não executou por
iniqua.) Mais tarde o Marquez de Pombal renovou esta lei com o mesmo
resultado. D'essa épocha em diante os clamores dos lavradores do campo
subiram ao throno de todos os nossos Monarchas sem que se achasse o
remedio.

Vê-se que já em 1464 se conhecia a causa das cheias, a mesma que hoje
apontamos, não só para o Mondego, mas tambem para grande numero de rios
da Europa.

O mar é provavel banhasse em épochas anteriores á Monarquia todo aquelle
valle a que chamam campos de Coimbra. Santa Eulalia ou Santa Olaia,
pequeno castello situado em um monte isolado ao Oeste de Monte-mór o
Velho, na entrada do paul de Fôja, tendo sido tomado aos Mouros pelo
Conde D. Henrique, foi doado por elle ao Mosteiro de Sancta Cruz _com
todas as rendas, portagens e mais direitos dos navios que entravam pela
foz do Mondego_[4]. Quatro seculos mais tarde, El-rei D. Manuel mandou
edificar uma ponte de pedra no paul de Fôja em lugar da de madeira que
existia _para obviar aos grandes fracassos que occasionavam aos povos as
marés que a inundavam_.

Em 1790 as marés ainda chegavam á barca de Monte-mór, junto ao monte da
Ladroeira[5]; hoje o seu limite é muito mais visinho ao Oceano; sómente
as marés grandes do equinocio do outomno fazem-se sentir até alli pelo
empate da agua do rio, que então traz pouca.

Não me demorarei em demonstrar que o campo levanta com os nateiros
depositados pelas cheias: O convento de Santa Clara, enterrado até ás
impostas da abobada da Egreja, edificios que desappareceram
completamente juncto a Coimbra, o provam de sobejo; ora, suppondo que os
nateiros elevem o campo de um quarto de pollegada por anno, termo medio;
de certo não serei taxado de exagerado pelos lavradores, admittindo que
o rio começasse a transbordar desde o anno 1400, pois no anno 1464 já
ouvimos queixas: serão 457 annos, o que nos dá 19 palmos d'elevação
desde o anno 1400 até agora; ora, segundo o nivelamento feito por
Estevão Cabral em 1790, a agua na ponte de Coimbra estava 63 palmos a
cima do preamar, logo em 1400 achava-se sómente 44 palmos acima d'este
plano; se o terreno conservou sempre a mesma inclinação relativa,
resulta que a maré em 1400 chegava a uma legoa de Coimbra ou pouco mais,
pois elle dá de declive 22 palmos á 1.^a legoa. Infelizmente não é
sómente o campo que levanta; o alveo do rio eleva-se mais depressa pelos
depositos d'arêa trazidos da Beira no tempo das cheias, a ponto que
chega á altura dos campos, e o Mondego abre um novo leito; assim tem ido
correndo á revelia por todo o valle nos seculos de que fallámos,
apoiando-se, ora nos montes do norte, ora nos do sul, cubrindo as terras
com camadas de arêa: haja vista o leito antigo ao nivel do campo, e o
novo encanamento feito em 1792, já meio entulhado, deixando apenas um
metro d'altura entre seu alveo e o nivel do campo.

Resumindo: «*O valle levanta com os nateiros; as marés retrogradam á
proporção; o alveo do rio eleva-se mais depressa que o campo; chegando á
altura d'este, as aguas procuram um novo leito.*» Eis a indole
invariavel do Mondego desde seculos, demonstrada tanto pelos documentos
historicos como pela observação dos factos que têm lugar á nossa vista.
Adiante procuraremos deduzir d'ella as legitimas consequencias. Mas
antes d'isso lancemos uma vista d'olhos sobre os inconvenientes trazidos
por um regimen tão irregular. São de duas especies: 1.^o considerados em
relação aos campos; 2.^o em referencia á navegação.

Pelo que diz respeito aos campos, o defeito capital do rio é sem dúvida
a sua grande elevação, que, como já vimos, tende sempre a augmentar. No
estado actual, um metro d'agua no rio, os campos já estão alagados:
quando essas inundações vêm no inverno depois do recolhimento ou antes
das sementeiras, as aguas não causam mal aos campos, antes pelo
contrario os fertilizam, é o seu estrume, nem se emprega outro; sem
ellas o campo era improductivo, pois o seu solo é formado de uma areia
fina misturada de humus sem argila quasi nenhuma; mas, quando as cheias
se apresentam em maio, fins d'agosto ou setembro, o mal é irreparavel:
vão-se as esperanças e o suor dos lavradores; a colheita está perdida.
Mesmo quando as inundações vêm em tempo competente, a grande velocidade
que traz a agua despenhada das serras, d'onde desce em torrentes,
escorregando sobre um terreno de grande declive e nú, composto de areias
roladas sem aggregação quasi alguma, leva comsigo enormes massas de
arêa, que vai depositando pouco e pouco, á proporção que a sua
velocidade diminue, isso é no leito do rio navegavel, de modo que por
baixo do rio temos um _rio d'arêas_, parte das quaes, d'involto com as
aguas, penetram pelas quebradas, para invadir o campo, que cobrem de
suas camadas e tornam o terreno improductivo por muito tempo; vejam-se
os campos de Bolão, onde as arêas esterilizaram duas legoas de
comprimento, sobre um quarto de legoa de largura. Se ao menos o Mondego
conservasse durante uma grande parte do anno uma estiagem regular, e um
volume d'agua maior no intervallo de cada cheia, as areias seriam
conduzidas ao mar pela corrente; mas 15 dias depois da chuva, o rio tem
mui pouca agua.

Em quanto á navegação, raras vezes no anno essa se faz com commodidade e
com a brevidade necessaria: assim no verão, a pouca agua que traz o rio,
ainda essa espalhada em diversos caneiros no mesmo leito, não dá
profundidade sufficiente para os mais pequenos barcos poderem navegar
com facilidade; a navegação faz-se então á vara, os barqueiros vêem-se
na obrigação de saltarem muitas vezes ao rio, e mesmo escavar a areia
para abrirem passagem; os barcos levam menos de meia carga, e gastam
dois e trez dias para ir da Figueira a Coimbra, quando deveriam gastar
um, mesmo na ausencia de todo o vento: d'ahi resulta uma grande despeza
de transporte para os generos que seguem esta via de communicação
principal de toda a Beira.

Para se conhecer a importancia d'essa navegação, direi que a Figueira é
hoje o 3.^o porto do Reino; 12 barcos cada dia (termo medio) transitam
pelo rio com generos, o que dá annualmente 4320 barcos, que, a 5
carradas cada um, transportam 21600 carradas além dos passageiros, que
são muitos visto que no inverno, por falta d'estrada, a communicação
entre Coimbra e Figueira por terra torna-se de uma difficuldade immensa.

Conhecida a causa do mal, que é, como já dissemos, a velocidade com que
as aguas da chuva descem dos montes ao rio, cavando enormes barrocas nos
flancos da serra, arrastando comsigo as areias para deposital-as no
leito do Mondego e por cima dos campos, ha duas especies de meios a
empregar para remover o mal: 1.^o _os meios preventivos_; 2.^o _os meios
repressivos_. Ninguem duvída, creio, que os primeiros sejam os mais
suaves e os mais valiosos tanto em politica, em administração, na guerra
como nas sciencias. A Hygiene é preferivel á medicina, e esta prefere
quando póde a prevenção á repressão.

Os elementos são temiveis, não por si, mas pela somma immensa dos seus
esforços parciaes: é pois antes do seu grande incremento que devemos
combatel-os, o que para os rios significa que devemos atacal-os na sua
origem, vêr se é possivel diminuir o volume das aguas que chegam
simultaneamente aos valles, demorando-as sobre o declive dos montes, e
para o Mondego especialmente evitar a alluvião d'arêas que vêm entulhar
o alveo.

Os meios até hoje empregados no Mondego foram todos
repressivos,--construir marachões, fazer encanamentos parciaes, ora pelo
norte, ora pelo sul; o resultado foi sempre o mesmo; o rio melhora por
algum tempo, entulha-se de arêas, é mister um novo encanamento em cada
seculo[6]; ora, proseguir em um systema de que a experiencia tem
mostrado a insufficiencia, é pertinacia pelo menos, é expôr-se a
enterrar novos milhões no rio, que tudo sepulta debaixo do seu leito[7].
Em quanto as aguas descerem das serras em 24 ou 30 horas, em quanto as
arêas, despenhadas das barrocas e dos montes pela impetuosidade da
torrente, chegarem ao valle onde o declive é quasi nullo e a largura
muito maior, em todo o rio e campo se hão de depositar, inutilisando em
poucos annos o melhor encanamento possivel. Com effeito, qual será o
leito que possa conter uma massa d'aguas que cobre todo o valle do
Mondego no comprimento de 6 legoas, com meia legoa de largura e altura
de um até 2 metros? Se não é possivel conter entre mottas esta enorme
massa d'aguas, que não conhece por margens senão os montes que bordam o
campo, se as mesmas causas produzem sempre os mesmos effeitos na ordem
dos phenomenos naturaes, devemos procurar destruir a causa, recorrer aos
meios preventivos, por elles diminuiremos o volume das enxurradas que
sahem de repente ao valle, tornaremos o rio navegavel de verão,
conservando-lhe as aguas; evitaremos que uma grande parte das areias
desçam ao rio, tornaremos em fim o seu regimen uniforme e estavel; então
sómente deveremos tractar de um encanamento regular, tornado muito mais
facil, mais durador e menos dispendioso. Estes meios são simples na sua
execução, e por uma grande felicidade favorecem a agricultura dos
montes, ao passo que evitam a ruina do campo, harmonizando o interesse
geral com o bem dos particulares.

O primeiro meio é applicavel a todos os terrenos d'encosta, desaguando
no Mondego ou nos affluentes d'este: consiste em cavar barrocas
horizontaes de um metro de largura (4-1/2 palmos) proximamente, com
2-1/2 palmos de profundidade, e 130 até 140 palmos de comprimento,
fechadas nas extremidades, collocadas em degráos por todo o declive dos
montes, com intervallo de cerca 300 palmos entre fileira e fileira.
Escuso dizer que encontrando-se algum obstaculo como rocha, estrada ou
valla, interrompe-se a barroca para continuar do lado opposto.

Este meio tão simples, que todo lavrador póde executar sem auxilio
d'arte, traz comsigo vantagens importantissimas: com effeito, sendo 6
legoas a distancia entre Coimbra e Lares, sendo meia legoa a largura
media do campo entre estes dous pontos, e sendo um metro a altura das
cheias ordinarias, segue-se que o volume d'agoa detido é 'neste caso de
92,557,410^{mc}, se, como diz Estevão Cabral, a superficie da Beira é de
200 legoas quadradas; admittindo que 1/3 seja planicie, restam 134
legoas quadradas de encostas ou serras, em que se devem abrir barrocas;
segundo o systema que apresentamos em 1000^m ou 100 hectares devem
abrir-se 15 barrocas de 1000^m de comprimento cada uma, ou 15000^m, que
a razão de 0,^{mc}5 por metro corrente, conterão 7500^{mc} d'agua;
admittindo que a legoa quadrada tenha 31 hectares, abriremos por legoa
quadrada 465,000^m de barrocas as quaes darão um producto de
232,500^{mc}, e as 134 legoas quadradas terão em deposito
31,155,000^{mc} d'agua; isto é, o terço do volume detido no campo, o que
será sufficiente para evitar as pequenas cheias de septembro ou de maio,
que causam damno ás colheitas; além d'isso as aguas da chuva, obrigadas
á descer os degráos d'esta grande escada, mesmo depois das barrocas
cheias, chegarão mais lentamente ao rio, dando tempo para escoar as
primeiras aguas, quebrarão a sua grande velocidade, e por consequencia
não levarão tão facilmente a terra vegetal e as areias; as terras
levadas depositar-se-hão 'nellas, e facil será ao lavrador pela limpeza
das barrocas estrumar as suas proprias terras, em quanto que hoje, ellas
vão beneficiar os proprietarios da base da montanha. O deposito d'agua
conservar-se-ha nas barrocas até fins d'abril, épocha em que findam as
chuvas, e filtrando na terra conservar-lhe-hão humidade até o principio
de junho, isto é, até ao tempo em que é necessaria aos cereaes; por este
motivo as terras dos montes tornar-se-hão mais productivas, pois todos
sabem que os estrumes precisam ser dissolvidos para penetrar na planta
em fórma de seiva, e todos lamentam a falta d'agua nos mezes do estio. O
augmento de producção compensará em dois ou trez annos a despeza da
abertura, que se reduz a 3$000 réis por hectare a razão de 20 réis o
metro corrente[8], attendendo a que os mezes d'inverno são os mais
proprios para este trabalho. Os pequenos lavradores podem _abril-as_
elles mesmos, visto ser o tempo o genero que menos lhes custa a dar
'naquella estação. Por este meio conseguiremos egualmente augmentar o
volume d'agua da estiagem, tornando a navegação mais facil; pois,
filtrando por entre as terras, tarde ou cedo a agua lá irá parar. Emfim,
evitaremos que uma parte das arêas venha entulhar o alveo do rio, o que
é mais para temer que a propria cheia.

Este systema novo de irrigações, já praticado em França em algumas
partes em vista do melhoramento da cultura, tem correspondido ao que
d'elle se esperava.

J. R. Pelonceau[9], insigne engenheiro francez, que o aconselha, tendo
presenciado a sua applicação, assevera ser proprio a todo o genero de
cereaes e legumes, e que as proprias mattas se tornam por este meio mais
productivas e viçosas.

_O segundo meio_, que propomos á meditação do público, é a plantação
d'arvoredos em todas as encostas que vertem no Mondego ou nos seus
affluentes: a medida não é nova, já o Marquez de Pombal a decretou; se
tivesse sido executada, não teriamos que lamentar os desastres que
procuramos remediar. Com effeito, uma montanha plantada de arvores, e
por consequencia cuberta de terra vegetal e musgos, actua como uma
esponja, que absorve a agua de repente e não a restitue senão pingo a
pingo; uma montanha calva perde rapidamente a sua terra vegetal, de
sorte que as chuvas escorregam sobre os seus flancos, dando origem ás
torrentes nos logares elevados, e ás inundações nos valles. Certamente
esta plantação geral das encostas não poderá ser feita por meio de uma
Lei violenta, nem tão pouco de repente; mas não posso deixar de notar
que as mattas vão desapparecendo da Beira, que a madeira já falta, que
ella tornar-se-ha tanto mais necessaria quanto maior fôr o
desinvolvimento da nossa civilisação. Os caminhos de ferro, as minas de
Leiria e outras, que por ventura existam na Provincia, serão um dia
exploradas, augmentando consideravelmente o consumo d'este genero. A
exportação vai crescendo d'anno para anno, e os estaleiros da Figueira
tomarão importancia logo que a barra seja de mais facil accesso: tudo
convida pois o lavrador previdente a semear pinhaes nos terrenos
arenosos, pouco proprios para outra cultura.

O Governo possue, assim como as Camaras municipaes, muitos terrenos na
Beira: cuide em mandar plantar mattas, abrir 'nellas barrocas
horizontaes; o seu desinvolvimento será mais rapido, a agricultura
conhecerá os seus verdadeiros interesses, e não será tão difficil, como
se poderia suppôr, alcançar esta reforma: ella poderá exigir dez ou
vinte annos para completar-se; mas o proveito para a navegação do rio e
para o campo de Coimbra será proporcional ao seu adiantamento. Em um
paiz como o nosso, em que os particulares não têm iniciativa, é mistér
que o Governo dê o exemplo com experiencias bem dirigidas.

_Como terceiro meio_ para evitar o entulhamento do rio, proporia
collocar em todas as barrocas, vallas ou affluentes e no proprio alveo,
nas suas partes não navegaveis, tapagens, feitas de estacas com ramos de
salgueiros entrelaçados; estas tapagens repetidas de 500 em 500 metros
perpendicularmente á corrente, deixariam filtrar as aguas, detendo as
arêas; e o seu custo é tão pequeno, que não duvído se venham a fazer com
grande vantagem.

Taes são as medidas, que julgo proprias para evitar o flagello das
inundações e tornar as aguas uma fonte de riqueza para os habitantes da
serra. Oxalá que a opinião pública favoreça este meu empenho. Se se
applicarem, como entendo deva ser, os tres meios conjunctamente, os
desastres irão diminuindo em proporção do adiantamento do novo systema
d'agricultura, e desapparecerão quando completo na bacia do Mondego;
tendo então o rio maior volume medio, arrojará para o mar grande parte
das arêas que o entulham. O encanamento será não só possivel, mas facil,
observando as regras de que ninguem discrepa; a saber: 1.^o _As mottas
devem ser eguaes nas duas margens_, pois fortificar uma d'ellas sem a
outra, é attacar a propriedade do visinho[10]. 2.^o _Um encanamento é um
trabalho que se deve fazer simultaneamente em todo o valle, sob pena de
ver destruidos os trabalhos feitos._ 3.^o _Os rios vão crescendo para a
foz; por consequencia a resistencia das mottas deve crescer em proporção
conveniente á jusante._


FIM.




*Notas:*

[1] Marry, _Cours de navegation_, pag. 6.

[2] Criação.

[3] _O Instituto_, Jornal scientifico e litterario, impresso em Coimbra.

[4] Memorias Montemorienses.

[5] Estevão Cabral, _Memoria sobre os melhoramentos do Mondego_.

[6] Encanamento feito pela margem norte em 1794. Encanamento novo feito
em 1792, já entulhado.

[7] Diz Estevão Cabral que ao pé da Gería ha pedra enterrada,
sufficiente para construir uma cidade.

[8] Um vallador a razão de 240 réis por dia, faz em terreno do monte 60
palmos correntes, com a largura e profundidade que indicâmos, o que dá 4
réis por palmo corrente ou 18 réis por metro, e nós calculâmos 20 réis
por metro corrente.

[9] J. R. Pelonceau, _Note sur les débordements des fleuves et
rivières_.

[10] A este respeito precisamos de uma boa legislação, pois no Mondego
cada um fortifica-se como quer, roubando o terreno do proprietario da
margem opposta, e tornando o rio cada vez mais sinuoso.




Lista de erros corrigidos


Aqui encontram-se listados todos os erros encontrados e corrigidos:

+-----------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
|           |        Original         |         Correcção         |
+-----------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| #pág. 15  | profundidode            | profundidade              |
|           |                         |                           |
| #nota 10  | raspeito                | respeito                  |
+-----------+-------------------------+---------------------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoria sobre o melhoramento da
cultura da Beira e da navegação do Mondego, by António de Almeida

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMORIA SOBRE O MELHORAMENTO ***

***** This file should be named 41389-8.txt or 41389-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/3/8/41389/

Produced by Rita Farinha, Alberto Manuel Brandão Simões
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
