Project Gutenberg's Os Cataventos, by António Augusto da Rocha Peixoto

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Os Cataventos

Author: António Augusto da Rocha Peixoto

Release Date: July 5, 2015 [EBook #49367]

Language: Portuguese

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OS CATAVENTOS ***




Produced by Rita Farinha (This file was produced from
images generously made available by BDAlentejo (Biblioteca
Digital do Alentejo)





    *Nota de editor:* Devido à existência de inconsistências
    nomeadamente relativas à numeração das imagens, foram tomadas
    decisões quanto à versão final. As decisões encontram-se descritas
    no fim desta obra.

                                          Rita Farinha (Julho 2015)




PORTVGALIA

MATERIAES PARA O ESTUDO DO POVO PORTUGUEZ

SEPARATA DO TOMO II, FASCICULO 3


Rocha Peixoto


OS CATAVENTOS

COM QUARENTA E SEIS ILLUSTRAÇÕES NO TEXTO


PORTO
IMPRENSA PORTUGUESA
112--_Rua Formosa_--112

1907




PORTVGALIA

MATERIAES PARA O ESTUDO DO POVO PORTUGUEZ

SEPARATA DO TOMO II, FASCICULO 3


Rocha Peixoto


OS CATAVENTOS

COM QUARENTA E SEIS ILLUSTRAÇÕES NO TEXTO


PORTO
IMPRENSA PORTUGUESA
112--_Rua Formosa_--112

1907




OS CATAVENTOS


Na meteorologia popular prognostica-se ácerca dos doze mezes do anno
conforme os aspectos dos primeiros doze dias de janeiro; ou presume-se
pelo vento que soprar á meia noire no dia da Senhora das Candeias, 2
de fevereiro, o vento dominante durante o resto do anno; ou conclue-se
pela agitação atmospherica n'umas temporas d'onde prevalecerá o
meteoro até ás seguintes; ou ainda mais restrictamente se avalía pelo
vento do dia de S. Miguel, 29 de setembro, o estado do inverno que se
approxima; ou, por ultimo,se infere da direcção observada á uma hora
da tarde do dia da Senhora da Ascenção qual o vento estival de
predominio. A verdade, porém, é que isto se caticina e mal se admitte.
Alguns adagios contradictam logo os prenuncios, pois

Quando deus queria,
Do Norte chovia.

Quando Deus quer, com todos os ventos chove.

Vento e ventura,
Pouco dura.


[Figura: Figs. 1 a 3]


De mais firmesa é a illação diaria tirada dos aspectos celestes,
associados frequentemente a relações com a ondulação orographica
local. «Vem ahi o trovão», diz-se no planalto de Barroso ao
observarem-se as formas de certas nuvens e a orientação da sua marcha.
E a trovoada, ás vezes diaria no estio, em breve surge. No Soajo,
formando-se ellas na portella de Tibo, apenas se «esbarram» em vento;
mas levantando-se uns «penduricalhos» no rio, sitio do Cachão, e
quando o castello da Nobrega «tem carapuça» irrompe a chuva. O mesmo
succede em Castro Laboreiro quando as nuvens «fazem chapeu» lá para os
montes do Gerez; e em Rebordãos, nas abas da serra da Nogueira, se
«está o buraco tapado», ou sejam as nuvens ao nascente, a agoa é
certa. Entretanto, como se diz no Soajo:


Chuvas de verão,
É como amores em vão.


A «maré pica de cima» ou a «maré pica de baixo» são as formulas com
que ordinariamente se distinguem os ventos norte e sul que annunciam
bom ou mau tempo. Todavia, e em regra, quando o vento do sul é forte,
a chuva não se prolonga tanto como se é mais brando do mesmo quadrante
(Castro Laboreiro).

Outras previsões fundamentadas em varios aspectos de nuvens, do
orvalho e circumstancias, logares e horas em que se mostra, de
attitudes dos aninmaes e até da agoa das fontes, asseguram nevoeiro ou
chuvas proximas, os trovões ou as nevadas.


[Figura: Figs. 4 a 6]


E mais quando os trabalhadores seccam as mãos e não se agarram aos
cabos das enxadas é signal de chuva, como é de trovoada, pela tarde,
quando, na faina do centeio, a palha tem difficuldade em guardar o
grão e se resente da humidade (Castro Laboreiro).


[Figura: Figs. 7 a 10]


Decerto que com alguns d'estes e outros prognosticos nem sempre condiz
a realidade ulterior dos factos. Mas em muitos a experiencia assegura
a certesa, tanta e precisa como a tem o aldeão, e o serrano
principalmente, quando se orienta. Assim, pelos cumes dos montes
descobertos se guiam, como pela altura do sol calculam a hora e ainda
pela direcção e extensão da sombra (Barroso). Depois do dia governa-os
o sete-estrello e por elle sabem se a noite vae alta (Nogueira,
Barroso, Laboreiro). Se pela tarde, emtanto, ha muito nevoeiro, é o
orvalho que os esclarece sobre a approximação da noite. «Já _lóze_ o
orvalho», isto é, já luz e portanto a noite chega (Castro Laboreiro).
Só quando o _camasso_ ou camada de neve é tal que tudo é branco
(Barroso) os mais sabidos se perdem nos caminhos; os homens
enterram-se até aos joelhos; os gados não podem marchar, sequer para
irem beber; e, na serra das Alturas, não é possivel mesmo sahir por um
e por dois mezes.


[Figura: Figs. 11 e 12]


Ainda outro impedimento de orientação, mas mais ephemero, vem com a
nevoa. Ha a esperar que se dissipe. E entretanto afugentam-a com
esconjuros, com formulas rimadas. Em Meirinhos, no concelho de
Mogadouro, os rapazes, quando pela manhã a olham, increpam-a e
mandam-a para a Villariça:


Névoínha peidorreira,
Vae para os cantos da ribeira,
Que está lá uma porca parida com leitões.
Come-lhe os leitões,
E manda a porca para os berrões.

[Figura: Figs. 13 e 14]

As grimpas, emtanto, sempre que as ha, são naturalmente observadas,
uma vez que este simples apparelho, limitado frequentemente a uma
bandeirola movendo-se em torno d'um eixo vertical, indica a direcção
do vento e, derivativamente, certos estados atmosphericos. Rara é a
torre que não remata em veleta. De dia, pois, e sem nevoa, a freguesia
tem na séde o instrumento que logo a elucida, mais ou menos
grosseiramente, sobre o tempo provavel.

[Figura: Figs. 15 e 16]

Este apparelho, a um tempo orientador e ornamental, procede da alta
edade-media tendo sido a principio um signal de nobresa[1] e portanto
um privilegio senhorial[2]. Além das edificações nobilitarias, só
tinham direito a exhibil-as as construções ecclesiasticas. De sorte
que figuravam muitas vezes as armas do mosteiro e do senhor em recorte
na chapa, pintadas ainda e douradas, ou outros symbolos da heraldica,
como corôas e leões rompantes. Nos seculos XIV e XV as grimpas
convertem-se em verdadeiros ornamentos. E como desde os fins do seculo
XI a torre, depois de ter sido uma fortificação que protegia a egreja,
comece a prestar-se ás funcções se multipliquem com uma liberdade
cheia de phantasia, tornando-se um poderoso instrumento de decoração e
de orgulho para cathedraes e mosteiros[3], as proprias ornamentações
dos remates mais se acuminam e alindam. Umas vezes a decoração exclue
a ventoínha e apenas consiste em combinações de folhas e flores, aves
e outra fauna de imaginação, figuras humanas e cupidos, de loiça,
ferro, chumbo ou zinco e do mesmo passo notaveis pela belleza de
execução e graça[4]. É a estes ornamentos em ponta que correspondem,
nos monumentos arabes, as terminações aceradas que um crescente
fecha[5]. As mais das vezes, porém a veleta apparece sob a forma de
monstros alados, dragões e animaes phantasticos[6], do archanjo S.
Miguel, anjos e navios[7], do gallo principalmente[8], tudo mais ou
menos historiado e até, da Renascença ao seculo XVII, com a assignatura
ou inspiração d'um artista emerito[9].

[Figura: Figs. 17 a 19]

[Figura: Figs. 20 a 23]

[Figura: Figs. 24 a 27]

[Figura: Figs. 28 e 29]

[Figura: Figs. 30 e 31]

[Figura: Fig. 32]

A serralheria portuguesa concorreu tambem, com a humildade
caracteristica da industria popular nacional, para a indigente
ornamentação dos acumes das torres e, mais restrictamente, de
castellos, de pharoes, de pelourinhos (Rates), de chafarizes
(Barcellos), de moínhos, de telhados, de chaminés (Alemtejo) e até
d'um mastro ou varo ao alto, em campos e quintaes. Dominam, todavia,
as de ferro nas egrejas. A flecha, designadamente adstricta a indicar
o rumo do vento, é simples, associada a folhagens, á cruz e á esphera
armillar, recortada outras vezes e até modificada na sua configuração
habitual, substituindo-se por um sol a massa posterior e mais pesada.
São exemplos as que se vêem em muitas habitações particulares (fig. 1),
a do convento dos dominicos de Amarante (fig. 2) e a do santuario da
Senhora da Abbadia (fig. 3). A combinação da bandeirola e da flecha é
patente na egreja de S. Victor, em Braga (fig. 4), pois a bandeira
apenas, como as de Santo Thyrso, de Moreira da Maia, de Santo Ildefonso,
no Porto, da Alcaçova, em Montemór-o-Velho, de Travanca (fig. 5) e da
capella do Bom Despacho, em Ancêde (fig. 6), são menos communs na
singelesa dos seus breves recortes. A regra é accusarem a suggestão da
flecha, como a do pelourinho de Rates (fig. 7), a do Carmo de Braga
(fig. 8), a da capella da Senhora da Graça de Villa Cahiz (fig. 9) e a
do mosteiro de Refojos do Lima (fig. 10). E a desfiguração d'esse
elemento sempre transparece, aliás, em exemplares como a da casa
particular do Trasladario, nos Arcos de Val de Vez (fig. 11),
ess'outra dos Arcos (fig. 12), a de Santo Antonio dos Frades, em Ponte
do Lima (fig. 13), a do Populo, em Braga (fig. 14), a da Misericordia
de Amarante (fig. 15) e a da matriz de Ancêde, em Baião (fig. 16). Com
os mesmos accessorios da cruz e da esphera armillar, mas mais
historiadas e accrescidas, são as da egreja do Espirito Santo, nos
Arcos de Val de Vez (fig. 17), e a da capella de S. João do Souto, em
Braga (fig. 18)[10]. A do Oratorio da Senhora da Saude das
Carvalheiras, n'esta ultima cidade (fig. 19), é apenas uma
interessante substituição pelos cravos e a corôa de espinhos.

[Figura: Fig. 33]

[Figura: Fig. 34]

Tam frequente é ainda o gallo, symbolo da vigilancia, vulgarissimo nas
torres das numerosas egrejas christãs[11], e já empregado de datas
longinquas[12]. Alguns mesmo assumiam proporções grandiosas: o da
torre da Ajuda, cuja veleta de bronze attingia 31 palmos de alto,
media 18 do bico á cauda[13]! Nas casas particulares ou seus annexos
(fig. 20), em Cedofeita e Carmo, no Porto, nas matrises da Trofa, de
Ponte do Lima, da Campeã (fig. 21) e de Castro Laboreiro (fig. 22), na
egreja da Senhora das Dôres, da Povoa de Varzim (fig. 23), na Lapa, em
Braga (fig. 24) e em outras e innumeraveis torres e campanarios, o
gallo apparece, ou associado simplesmente á cruz ou a folhagens e
emblemas ornamentaes. Outras aves raramente pretextarão o ornato
accessorio das grimpas, como o caso das duas geminadas no Seminario de
Braga (fig. 25), ou então o papel exclusivamente decorativo do
admiravel pelicano de bronze da Sé de Vizeu, inicialmente estante de
côro, e durante muito tempo adaptado, depois de mutilado, a uma torre
da cathedral, por cima do sino do relogio[14]!

Da fauna ha ainda os peixes, principalmente nas povoações da beira-mar
(Mattosinhos, Santa Cruz do Bispo, Lavra, etc.), os leões mais ou
menos barbaros como o da egreja de Pico de Regalados (fig. 26) e os
dragos da fauna mythica, como o do mosteiro de Santa Maria de Bouro
(fig. 27), já de remota concepção e uso[15].

[Figura: Fig. 35]

A iconographia dos anjos é mais vasta e variada em pormenores. Vêem-se
com a mitra e o baculo no hospital de S. Marcos de Braga (fig. 28),
com o calice em Guimarães, com o sol na matriz de Fão e na egreja de S.
Francisco, em Ponte do Lima (fig. 29), com a tuba em S. Bento, no
Porto, e em S. Martinho de Gallegos, junto a Barcellos, com outros
emblemas em S. Paio, nos Arcos (fig. 30), com arco e setta na egreja
de S. Domingos, em Amarante (fig. 31), com a espada em Guimarães e no
santuario do Allivio, em Soutello, e com o gladio ondeante na matriz
de Monsão. Este motivo decoral, de execução mais difficil, é tambem
dos mais generalisados nos templos christãos; e occorre relembrar o
celebre _anjo de ouro_ do campanario de S. Marcos, em Veneza,
esculptura de madeira de 5 metros de alto, revestida de chapas de
bronze dourado e inaugurada solemnemente como catavento no primeiro
quartel do seculo XVI[16].

[Figura: Fig. 36]

[Figura: Fig. 37]

Veem por ultimo, e d'ordinario na habitação privada, outras figuras
alheias aos themas convencionaes, como o homem sobre um sol e que
consulta os astros, n'uma casa da Povoa de Varzim (fig. 32), o homem
que maneja um alfange, o miliciano que aponta uma espingarda, o
cavalleiro que galopa, o cavalleiro que peleja (Povoa de Lanhoso),
outras mais.

[Figura: Fig. 38]

De toda esta obra de serralheria só excepcionalmente se aparta uma
grimpa mas interessante de concepção e realisação, como as já
alludidas de S. João do Souto, de Monsão e de Bouro e ainda a
agradavel cruz ornamentada de Santa Eugenia de Rio Côvo, perto de
Barcellos. No norte, como no sul[17], as veletas e outra obra
artistica de ferro manifestam vivamente a subalternidade portuguesa
ante a sumptuosa variedade e merito artistico da obra similar
hespanhola.

Entretanto não se limitam ás grimpas os pequenos instrumentos de
engenho popular accionados pelas correntes aereas. Ha-os que são
exclusivamente decorativos; outros destinam-se a afugentar as aves que
assaltam os fructos; outros ainda são ventoínhas reguladoras, mais ou
menos. Um muito interessante pela simplicidade, graça e utilisação
d'um recurso commum e local é a especie de anemometro executado com
duas varas em cruz, rematando cada extremidade com a valva concava
d'um lamellibranchio do Gen. _Pecten_, o _P. maximus_, L. (fig. 33).
Usam-o em varias freguesias do concelho da Povos de Varzim, como
Amorim (Abremar), Beiriz e Terroso, dando assim ás conchas uma das
varias applicações, ou ornamentaes ou utilitarias, já conhecidas[18].

[Figura: Fig. 39 a 41]

Na mesma região até uma canna, com um velho retalho de sola figurando
de bandeira, serve de catavento. O modelo, porém, mais geral é o
denominado _ventiéla_ (fig. 34) commum não só em todo o concelho, mas
ainda n'outros e com ligeiras alterações constructivas, como em Bouças,
por exemplo (fig. 35).

Annexando á ventiéla uma velha vasilha de folha de ferro e duas
pedritas suspensas por fios do eixo movel, de sorte a percutirem
repetidamente a lata quando o apparelho está em movimento, temos o
catavento, _corta-vento_ ou _bate-bate_ que afugenta a passarda das
figueiras e das vinhas. É a _taraméla_ de Ponte do Lima (fig. 36), a
_tarabella_ de Lindoso e Miranda, a _cacaréla_ de Melgaço, o _ratatau_
e _catraméla_ de Santa Martha de Penaguião, a _ralhadeira_ do Soajo, o
_batedor_ de Barroso, o _rigibó_ ou _ruge-ruge_ de Cabeceiras e do
Arco de Baúlhe (fig. 37), um modelo geral, emfim, com estas
designações ou outras, empregado em quasi todo o paiz para semelhante
destino--como, para a defesa dos ervilhaes, o casaco, as calças e
chapeu velhos suspensos de dois paus em cruz e formando o geralmente
denominado _espantalho_.

[Figura: Fig. 42]

[Figura: Fig. 43]

A designação barrosã de _batedor_ applica-se, aliás, em Lindoso a
outro engenho com intuitos semelhantes, ou sejam de espantar a
_beadilha_--bichos bravos, como o texugo e a raposa--mas em que o
vento não interfere. É uma caixa de madeira disposta sob um veio de
agoa que vem d'alto. Ao fundo addiciona-se-lhe uma longa taboa que
remata por um mascôto e cujo peso, quando a caixa está vasia, inclina
esta para a frente. Enchendo-se de fluído, o recinto então pesa mais,
ergue-se veloz e logo verte e se esvasía. Volve, pois, á posição
inicial, isto é, inclinando-se para o lado do mascôto; e ao voltar
este bate rijamente n'uma taboa sobjacente. São estas pancadas
successivas e espaçadas que amedrontam e afastam a bicharia.

[Figura: Fig. 44]

[Figura: Fig. 45]

A intenção ornamental determina a adopção d'outros brinquedos em que
do vento apenas se deseja motricidade, sem nada inquirir do rumo em
que caminha. São as flammulas e bandeiras dos _coruchos_ ou cupulas
das moreias (Ponte da Barca, Barcelos, etc.), associadas
frequentemente a cruzes floreadas, a estrellas, a arcos de festas, e
ás vezes mesmo ao pucaro invertido que corôa as mêdas (Maia, Bouças,
Porto, etc.); são as reducções dos moínhos de vento (fig. 38) com os
mesmos pannos e varaes, em logares, como Laundos e Terroso, no
concelho da Povoa de Varzim, onde funccionam estas rudimentares
estancias de moagem; são os curiosos bonecos de madeira que se veem
nas hortas, jardins e campos desde Barcellos e Povoa de Varzim até á
Maia e parte do concelho de Bouças. O exame das figuras, todas
pintadas a côres vivas, logo indica como se effectua o andamento
(figs. 39 a 42). Outr'ora, em Azurara, raro era o quintal que não
possuía uma ventoínha figurada, em regra esculpida por marujos em
descanço. E em alguns casos, que hoje só por acaso se observam na area
dita, em vez d'uma figura havia muitas, peões e cavalleiros batalhando
sobre uma circumferencia com cerca d'um metro de diametro.

Ainda um barco, com a cordoalha de arame e as vélas de tecido de
algodão (fig. 43) estava organisado e orientado de sorte (Povoa de
Varzim) a realisar movimentos que imitavam a marcha d'uma nave. Mas já
outra esculptura immovel, do mesmo habilidoso, apenas manifestava, a
seu modo, um symbolismo: era um _saragoçano_ em face do tripé que
sustentava o oculo de alcance e inquirição; á frente o cão fiel; a um
lado um anjo inspirador, sustentando nas mãos os astros sobre cuja
influencia incidiam as observações do astrologo, atraz, e a uma meza,
o secretario que registava as observações e os algarismos (figs. 44 e
45).

[Figura: Fig. 46]

Como arte popular esta esulptura lembra os brutescos que os ceramistas
de Aveiro fabricavam para ornamento dos telhados. Apenas os esculpidos
e levantados para ventoínhas teem sobre aquelles o interesse do
movimento.

Ora nem só as creanças, com os seus _corrupios_ e _gregorios_ (fig.
46), se apropriam do vento como agente do brinquedo: tambem o homem,
independentemente da utilidade orientadora do engenho, edifica grimpas
e cataventos que o mesmo motor faz trabalhar para seu regalo
esthetico--bem limitado, em verdade!

Porto. Janeiro, 1907.




*Notas*:

[1] Viollet-le-Duc, _Dict. raisonné de l'architecture française du X
au XVI siècle_, VI, voc. _Girouette_, pags. 28-9. Bauce ed. Paris,
1863.

[2] Camille Enlart, _Manuel d'archéologie française depuis les temps
mérovingiens jusqu'à la Renaissance_, II, _Architecture civile et
militaire_, pag. 177. A. Picard ed. Paris. 1904.

[3] Louis Gonse, _L'art gothique_, pags. 110-1. Quantin ed. Paris, s.
d.--André Michel, _Histoire de l'Art_, capitulo de Camile Enlart,
_L'architecture romane_, I, 2.^a parte, pags. 450-2. A. Colin ed.
Paris, 1905.

[4] Henry Havard, _Dict. de l'ameublement et de la décoration depuis
le XIII^e siècle jusqu'à nos jours_, II, voc. _Épi_, pags. 503-4 e
figs. 339 a 342. Quantin ed. Paris, s. d.--Viollet-le-Duc, ob. cit.,
V, mesmo voc., pags. 271-87.

[5] Prisse d'Avennes, _L'art arabe d'après les monuments du Kaire_.
Morel & C.^{ie} eds. Paris, 1877.

[6] Havard, ob. cit., voc. _Girouette_, pag. 1099.--Viollet-le-Duc,
ob. cit., VI, voc. _Croix_, pag. 427.

[7] Enlart, _Manuel_ cit., pag. cit.

[8] Viollet-le-Duc, ob. cit., VI, voc. _Croix_, pag. cit., e voc.
_Coq_, pags. 305-6.

[9] Havard, ob. cit., voc. _Girouette_, pag. 1100.

[10] Pela distancia e situação do desenhista em relação ao objecto
esboçado, algumas das grimpas figuradas não apresentam o rigor de
perspectiva nem a minucia de pormenor que os embaraços accusados
explicam.

[11] Viollet-le-Duc, ob. cit., VI, voc. _Coq_, pag. 306.--Paul
Sébillot, _Les travaux publics et les mines dans les traditions et les
superstitons de tous de pays_, pag. 383. Rothschild ed. Paris, 1894.

[12] Viollet-le-Duc, ob. cit., VI, voc. _Croix_, pag. 432.

[13] Ribeiro Guimarães, _Summario de varia historia_, V, pag. 175.
Rolland & Semiond eds. Lisboa, 1875.

[14] Filippe Simões, _A Exposição retrospectiva de arte ornamental
portugueza e hespanhola em Lisboa_, pag. 78. Typ. Universal. Lisboa,
1882.

[15] Havard, ob. cit., II, voc. _Girouette_, pag. 1099.--Enlart,
_Manuel_ cit., II, pag. 177.

[16] Gabriel Pereira, _O Campanario de S. Marcos_, in _Bol. da R.
Assoc. dos architectos civis e archeologos portuguezes_, serie IV,
fasc. 5.^o, pag. 32. Lisboa, 1902.

[17] Gabriel Pereira, _Estudos eborenses_, fasc. VII, pag. 25. Minerva
eborense. Evora, 1886.

[18] Rocha Peixoto, _Notas sobre a malacologia popular_, in _Revista
de Sciencias Naturaes e Sociaes_, I, pags. 75-90. Porto, 1890.




Lista de decisões efectuadas

Aqui encontram-se listadas as decisões tomadas em momentos menos
claros da revisão desta obra:

A partir da fig. 29 existe um desfasamento na numeração das imagens.
Mantivemos essa discrepância devido às diversas referências às figuras
que se encontram ao longo do texto, podendo a sua renomeação alterar
a relação pretendida pelo autor.





End of Project Gutenberg's Os Cataventos, by António Augusto da Rocha Peixoto

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OS CATAVENTOS ***

***** This file should be named 49367-8.txt or 49367-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/3/6/49367/

Produced by Rita Farinha (This file was produced from
images generously made available by BDAlentejo (Biblioteca
Digital do Alentejo)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

